let me ask the movie Leave the World
Behind which was produced by the
Obamas paints a pretty distressing
picture of how you could turn America
against itself in Three Easy Steps step
three being civil war how easy do you
think it is in reality to destabilize
the us or any other major country I love
that you start with this question and I
love that you didn't give me any hints
that you were going to start with this
question cuz I recently watched Leave
the World Behind and I thought it was
just a brilliant piece of The Human
Experience right first of all to answer
your question directly destabilizing the
United States would be very difficult
because at the end of the day the US is
a we are a strong unifying culture when
we are attacked it supersedes all other
things that's that we saw that with 911
we saw it in the Vietnam War we saw it
time and time again right when we are
attack it unifies us that's not like
it's not the same cultural response
every country has so if we were to see a
large
scale hack if TVs were to suddenly go
down radios were to suddenly go down if
the whole network and infrastructure
started to fall apart if Tesla started
self-driving themselves and blocking
roads the last thing we would do is
start killing each other if anything we
would all unify because at our core we
are a fighting culture it's one of our
biggest flaws and one of our biggest
strengths we are a Waring culture here
in the United States now that said the
the part of the of the movie that to me
was so precient was that instead of us
having one
enemy we faced a
Unity a Unity force of enemies that were
all collaborating and coordinating the
attack together so that's what the
movie's premise was right what if it
wasn't one bad guy what if it was an
amalgam of people who don't like you
essentially what if 10 bullies attacked
you instead of one bully I think that is
getting to the heart of What conflict
really looks like now and What conflict
will look like for the United States for
the Next Generation tell me more about
that I've heard you talk about this
you've said something that unfortunately
uh Rings a little too true to me which
is that World War III has already
begun uh if that's true it certainly
doesn't feel like it so um what do you
mean by that what does world what do you
think World War II will
or does look like so it's interesting
that you say that because when when I
hear people say it doesn't feel like
World War I has
started World War II when it started
also didn't feel like World War II had
started for America if you recall
America didn't get involved in World War
II until after all of Europe had
basically been ingested by the Nazi
party Only After Japan attacked Pearl
Harbor did World War II start being felt
by Americans World War II is very
similar what we're seeing right now is a
a whol scale attack on American
resources the US dollar uh American
influence American
dominance and any war is really about
bringing your bringing your opponent
down in terms of influence and power and
at the same time increasing your own
influence and power what World War I
where World War II looks different than
World War II is that World War II is
being fought through these proxy wars
Third Country battles often times poor
or impoverished battles that are being
bankrolled by large world leaders if you
look at Libya if you look at Syria if
you look at Afghanistan if you look at
Yemen all these fit the proxy war model
and those are just major conflicts there
are minor conflicts happening all over
Asia Latin America and South America or
Latin America and uh and Africa that
show even more active involvement by the
United States the Russians the Chinese
uh North and South Koreans uh Turks
Germans waging conflict through third
countries all over the planet and what
are they fighting for what makes it
worthwhile for the United States to
engage in a in a conflict against the
houthis and Yemen what makes it worth it
for Iran to invest in the same conflict
the reason it's a good investment is
because they are increasing their own
influence and power without risking
their own Nationals or without risking
their own military successes or failures
it's it's easier to fund a civil war
from outside than it is to uh engage in
what's known as interstate War which is
when your nation state invades another
nation state like we're seeing with
Russia and Ukraine okay Civil War uh
this is a it's the idea that really
stood out to me in the movie Leave the
World Behind uh it's something I've
thought a lot about my audience has
heard me talk at nauseum about Ray
Delio's growing um percentage prediction
of Civil War here in the US it's
interesting that you call us a Waring
culture that we're very good at uniting
because we are also proving that we're
very good at splitting almost exactly
right down the middle which I have a
whole thesis about which maybe we'll get
into um but while I agree with you that
I think the movie Leave the World Behind
is just exceptionally unrealistic in
terms of it's like oh first isolation
and just oh just take out all their
Communications no big deal uh that would
be brutally difficult and of course if
somebody could they would have
already but it it's one of those where
from a movie perspective the suspension
of disbelief to point out a human truth
I think is really precious I don't think
it is accidental that the Obamas are
behind this somebody that's been in the
War Room somebody that really
understands uh what the darker side of
human nature can look like when when um
nudged in the right direction and the
it's it's very theatrical I do not want
anybody to think I'm saying hey that's a
documentary on how this will go very
much not but once you grant them that
then you can look at okay when a country
is divided when people turn on
themselves it's the ultimate um
destabilizing factor and when I look at
less so honestly with Russia and Ukraine
which may be my ignorance but I don't
think so very much so with Israel and or
Israel and Palestine depending on how
you want to think about it that one to
me feels like they have an anchoring
ideology which makes it effectively
impossible for them to get along and by
leveraging that you get some really dire
consequences and so we're seeing that
play out in real life and that to me is
what they're playing with in the movie
Leave the World Behind is okay just
grant me that they are divided and now
what does it look like once people begin
turning on each other tapping into the
tribalism tapping into this sense of
wanting to protect you and yours and
that is an algorithm running in the
human animal and so when you for people
that haven't seen you before which would
be shocking at this point uh but with
your background as a CIA agent um how do
you tap into that like when I think
about the velocity of information
created by social media my original
intro for this episode that I wrote was
that the internet really changed
everything because it it allows human
psychology to play out in a different
way and the way that the internet allows
human psychology to play out is is it is
so easy to confuse people it is so easy
to confuse people and if I'm looking at
forget the movie if I'm looking at
what's really happening I'm not even
saying it's coordinated I'm just saying
that the velocity of information that
comes across your social feed
where you have the algorithm from an AI
perspective colliding with the AI that
runs the human any individual human
yours is going to be different than the
next person but there's enough
similarity that we can really get some
flywheels going but the velocity of
information makes it very easy to
confuse people because people are
extraordinarily bad at understanding a
position from a nuanced place and so if
you were going to analyze the situation
that we're in now where you've got
someone like reelio who has a lot of
credibility in my opinion saying okay uh
likelihood of civil war is going up
you've got your own take the World War
III is potentially already happening
that this is a proxy battle we've got
things popping off in the Middle East
we've got things popping off in Russia
um how do we pour fuel on a fire that's
already burning by confusing people with
fast information so what's really
interesting is is you're exactly right
that people get confused easily and
you're exactly right that velocity of
information is a factor in that
confusion where I would Challenge and I
don't think you were saying this
outright but I I want to make sure that
nobody misunderstands that velocity of
information and confusion existed long
before the internet long before social
media you don't I I will potentially
take exception to that and I will say
that the velocity of information that
you could get before would come from a
narrow band of sources correct and now
the velocity of information not only is
a 100 times a thousand times faster it
is coming from a thousand times more
sources and so it does feel unique this
moment I don't disagree with you yeah I
agree with you in terms of volume I it's
velocity that I'm focusing on right
volume absolutely we have more
information now in more channels in more
Avenues than ever before but think about
you think about our parents our parents
used to wait every day for the morning
newspaper and for the 5:00 news I
remember my dad rushing home for the 5
o'clock news
why because those two touch points were
essentially the only time they had in an
entire day to find out what was going on
anywhere else so when that 60-page
newspaper landed on the doorstep on
Sunday morning that was that was
everything that was the Holy Grail for
news for the week so if you think about
it in terms of velocity as fast as you
could read through those 60 Pages you
got all your new information everything
challenged what you previously knew and
everything set the stage for what you
were going to assume until until the
next Sunday paper or until the next
Monday local paper same thing with the
5:00 or 6:00 news you you waited for
that moment and whatever update came in
that 30 minute or 1 hour cycle became
your foundation of Truth for the next 24
hours we live in a world now where the
volume and the velocity combine so now
what you learn this second literally
changes when your feed refreshes half a
second later right so the the volume is
so different and the velocity and the
volume combined exacerbate the what what
I think you correctly call the confusion
of information this is another element
when you ask me how I see this as a CIA
officer one of the core things that
people don't understand is that in an in
in a uh covert influence
campaign I mean that's for a CIA officer
covert influence is a tactical rule book
it's a it's a recipe here's how you make
it you crack two eggs you take two cups
of sugar and you have and you melt some
butter that's how you make a Cake cover
influence campaign has three parts one
of those parts is simply creating
information that that contradicts other
information that exists not by creating
something new but by exacerbating
something that's already
believed so you just take two existing
narratives and you pour fuel on one of
those narratives just to make it burn
and then as conflict erupts between
these two narratives then you pour fuel
on the other narrative just to keep the
fire going and that's how you start a
covert influence campaign the goal of
covert influence is not to get people to
believe in something it's to get them to
get confused by everything so that you
can create General chaos because chaos
degrades the ability for unification
that's the real goal behind cobber
influence how real is the threat of
covert influence it's not even a it's
not even a threat it's a guarantee it's
happening all the time it's happening
everywhere around us all the
time organized organized disorganized
intentional unintentional statun
transnational government sponsored us
sponsored cover influence is happening
everywhere all the
time in 2016 I wasn't paying attention
to it I'll be honest I was just building
building building building and uh I was
very sort of caught off guard in that
moment of a sense of oh wow like even
whether or not Russia was actually
engaging in trying to influence the
election I had never considered that
somebody would try to influence the
election and so it made me go wait a
second like that's actually again
whether true or not it's a plausible it
it might even be smart to think about
how government agencies are using PR or
propaganda however you want to look at
it to influence what people think uh and
then on the back of all this I start
reading about history and the more I
read about history the more I get really
concerned about how things can and do go
off the rails in the most violent
horrifying ways possible and all of a
sudden it felt important to pay
attention yeah not necessarily to be
overly paranoid and the last thing I
want to do is beat the drum of like hey
everybody need to panic no one should
Panic right but as you will have heard
in my intro to this episode if you want
to win the game of life you're going to
need to pay attention to the players and
the pieces and the the real essence of
the game that's being played what I
would love is for you to walk out using
this moment that we're in where we're
building towards an election M and
there's at a minimum going to be um just
very straightforward simple desire to
influence the voting public to voting
for a given candidate let's even just
assume it's all above board it's no
one's trying to be um it's not a foreign
government it's just people are going to
try to sway your way of thinking how can
people anchor themselves to something so
that they can think through this problem
well you and I talked about this last
time we were together that to me is is
the whole shtick whether you want to be
a good parent whether you want to be a
good uh partner in a relationship
whether you want to be a a great
entrepreneur you must be able to Think
Through novel problems well how so one
of the things I I always get excited
about and discouraged by is that your
questions are so good and there's so
many elements inside each question that
we could pick apart so like with what
you just said with with what you just
asked about how do we handle this well
prior to that you started talking about
kind of becoming aware of influence in
2016 um prior to that you mentioned uh
Palestine and Hamas
interchangeably right what I see is in
the question you actually start to
show how difficult it is to splice these
things apart Hamas and Palestine are two
totally different
things the government of Hamas and the
terrorist militant group group of the
alasm Brigade within Hamas is completely
different than the Palestinian people
the Palestinian Authority the fata
government right those are all but all
of those are part of Palestine so just
to put in in the context of where I'm
steering us uh so trying to understand
how to think through a problem well
which we are all faced with you you have
two options put your head down you will
be used as a pawn pick your head up pay
attention you can hopefully navigate
this well what I hear you saying is you
have to accurately map out what is
really happening so in this case it's
and I wasn't trying to say that they're
indistinguishable what I was trying to
say is some people will talk about Hamas
other people will talk about Palestine
so however you want to think about that
right um but getting getting an
understanding of what what is actually
happening or an accurate assessment of
the players the pieces is how I
typically refer to it is that where
you're going like you just have to
really map the terrain yeah well that's
where I'm starting from that's where I'm
starting from for sure because even when
you talk about the 2016 elections
and how the whole world woke up to the
fact that influence was happening in
2016 but nobody seems to ask the
question of if we caught it in 2016 how
many previous elections were it happened
that we didn't catch it and why would we
ever think that any of our elections
were ever safe from cover influence just
because we didn't have social media just
because Facebook wasn't a giant in 2008
why do we think it we didn't also
experience something then too so the the
starting point to your answer your
question the starting point is to
understand that emotional decision-
making is what the human brain wants to
do it wants to make emotional decisions
because emotional decisions require less
cognitive ability less like less
calories less time it's so much easier
to just fall back on what you were
conditioned as a kid to believe what you
have experienced as an adult what your
opinions are what your friends say it's
just the easiest fastest way to make a
decision the brain is inherently very
conservative of its energy we often joke
that the brain is lazy so the brain just
jumps to conclusions and when you give
it a way of jumping to a conclusion it
likes that it's like muscle memory I'm a
Christian therefore I'm pro-life so
anytime you bring up anything Christian
I'm going to say pro-life the brain
loves that because it saves all this
analysis and contextualizing and
synthesis and synthesis and information
vetting it SA itself all that trouble by
just jumping to a conclusion so you see
information is presented to you in what
form in a way that triggers an emotional
response even to your point about the
whole like Palestine and hamasa
presented in a way where it's hard to
distinguish the difference between the
two I completely agree the reason they
are presented that way is to make it
easy for the human brain in the target
audience to LEAP to the conclusion that
Palestine is Hamas Hamas is Palestine
sign they are the same which makes
everything happening in Israel right now
under the rubric of terrorism it's if
that's the narrative you want to portray
it's easy to get there when you don't
differentiate when you don't use
subtlety and Nuance to explain your
information as soon as you start to dig
into the information as soon as you
start to map the battlefield you start
to see all the changes in the terrain
you start to see the tree line you start
to see the sand pits you start to see
the the areas that are high ground and
highest ground and how they're different
from the low ground and the lowest
ground right so it takes that level of
awareness to be able to really land on a
meaningful decision so the first thing
to understand is that we decide you me
the smartest people the dumbest
people it's it's irrelevant of your your
race age Creed or education level we all
Pink Matter brain matter decide first
and easily through emotions through an
emotional lens it's sometimes called
emotional
reasoning emotion and reasoning are two
different things but when you reason
through a lens of emotion it's a
cognitive distortion that we call
emotional
reasoning understanding that is kind of
the first step yeah no doubt uh so I
have a big bumper sticker that I try to
get people to take in for this very
reason so I agree uh you have to map the
train you have to understand what's
actually going on you have to distrust
yourself that's bumper sticker that's a
great bumper sticker because um you
can't make decisions without emotions so
literally if you selectively damage the
area of the brain that's in charge of
emotions people can give you all the
reasons why fish is better than beef and
then they still in the end they can't
make a decision because without the
ability to process emotion to push in
One Direction or another you you
literally I don't mean this like as an
analogy you literally can't make a
decision without emotion the bad news is
that your emotions are influenced by
your frame of reference so everything
that happened to you from the time you
were a little kid whatever until today
like all of it creates the context that
will trigger an emotion now the problem
is the emotion to your point makes a
decision feel obvious and so you context
plus the whatever happens creates
emotion emotion makes one decision
obvious over the other but that doesn't
mean it's the quote unquote right
decision um okay so you have map the
terrain you have understand the way the
Pink Matter uh is working that you're
going to be making these decisions
emotionally what what else goes into
this remember I'm trying to get people
to your 2024 for sure is going to be
brutal uh because this is an election
year here in the US because there are
multiple Wars going on but just in
general if you can anchor yourself and
think well through problems that you
haven't seen before you're going to do
far better in life um so that is the
umbrella under under which I asked the
question after you map the battlefield I
mean to use a military parallel after
you map the battlefield the next thing
you need to do is take in all Source
intelligence all Source intelligence
means you're accepting information from
all sources how do you make sure you're
not taking in biased sources since every
source is probably biased so because
every source is biased that's the
Assumption you have to have about every
source so the important thing is we're
all accustomed to taking in certain
trusted sources Mom Dad wife husband
sisters brothers co-workers whatever it
might be maybe your trusted source of
CNN maybe your trusted source is Fox
News maybe your trusted Source BBC maybe
your trusted source is AP we all have
our trusted
sources but those trusted sources are
all biased in some way whether it's a
lean or a
full-blown Wing we don't know but
everything's biased in some way so the
only way to offset the bias is to take
in information from the opposite
opposite bias now if you've ever been a
Boy Scout if you've ever done anything
like Land Navigation you can always
identify where you are located by doing
something called a reverse asmith
casting a reverse asouth have you ever
heard this hell is that so when you look
on a compass and you point the compass
at where you're trying to go you're
creating an aouth a
direction in Reverse if you're trying to
find out where you are you can find a
landmark a tall mountain uh a building a
cathedral a city whatever else it might
be aim your compass at the Landmark and
now casting the reverse Direction you
know where you are in comparison to The
Landmark if you do that with two
landmarks those two landmarks have an
intersection point and now you know your
true
location so a reverse asmith in the
information space means you listen to
left leaning news but then you also
listen to right leaning news where they
say the same thing thing you have a high
confidence that it's accurate where they
say everything else doesn't necessarily
mean either side is wrong it's just
starting to show you their bias but what
you have confidence in is where they
agree if you do that enough times you
start to have a foundation of truth I
know this to be true I have high
confidence that this is true because
left leaning and right-leaning news
sources are saying this is happening but
then everything around it what we would
call the fog of War everything around it
is UN known it's wrapped in fog it
hasn't been discovered yet it hasn't
been reported yet it hasn't been stress
tested or vetted yet so it's a foggier
area it's an area of of missing
information Vice your small pond or your
small island of known information and as
it's it's difficult for most people to
actually put it into practice because it
slows the world down why does it slow
the world down because your two biggest
enemies
are Velocity and volume velocity and
volume of information lead to confusion
so if you can decrease the volume and
slow down the speed to identify the true
facts guess what you're fighting against
the very same confusion you're trying to
overcome right a big part of the reason
that Intel failures happen a big part of
the reason why Intel flaps and Intel
mistakes happen is because professional
Intelligence Officers try to slow things
down and reduce the volume volume in
terms of noise but also volume in terms
of Mass to find the true facts that we
can make something meaningful out of
well sometimes in all the volume and all
the
speed nuggets of intelligence that are
super relevant find their way in but you
don't see them because they're hidden in
the noise that's how 9/11 happened in
many ways that's how October 7th
happened in Israel right nuggets were
hidden in the noise and unfortunately we
didn't learn about that until after we
had the time to do a post analysis and
look back on what happened
M you can reboot your life your health
even your career anything you want all
you need is discipline I can teach you
the tactics that I learned while growing
a billion- Dollar business that will
allow you to see your goals through
whether you want better health stronger
relationships a more successful career
any of that is possible with the mindset
and business programs in Impact Theory
University join the thousands of
students who have already accomplished
amazing things tap now for a free trial
and get started today
day I think it was sunzu that said um
all of war is deception so I also have
to imagine that within the noise there
are a lot of um nuggets that are placed
erroneously on purpose trying to point
you in a completely different direction
okay one thing is that the recipe for
you or is there more it's a great so I
would say the recipe is to to get a
sense of the battlefield take in all
sorts intelligence and then actually
synthesize in addition to analyze the
information analyzing me yeah okay I
think you're about to do what I was
going to ask analyzing the information
means you take it in and you start to
cross reference it to see where it
aligns y That's analyzing the
disagreeing things where they overlap
right and then are you seeing Trends
right that's all part of analysis
synthesis then means that you take open
gaps open question marks and you start
to actively take steps to fill in those
questions to fill in those missing spots
so if you think of it an analysis is
passive analysis is just taking what you
find taking what you get and then
creating a a document or a a grid that
has gaps in it and then you pass it to
somebody and say Here's my analysis we
know these three things we don't know
these three things synthesis is we know
these three things we don't know these
three things but here's how we will find
the answer to these other these other
missing
spots when you and I start to synthesize
the information that we have it starts
to give us us a active tool that we can
use to collect information we can go to
people that we trust people that that we
like talking to people that we know are
bigger thinkers or look beyond the noise
and we can start asking them their
opinions you get to do this every day on
your show you get to ask big questions
of of people that are Advanced thinkers
and you get to inform your own opinion
every step of the way you are
synthesizing every step of the way every
time you have one of these interviews
people who watch you are doing the same
thing they're synthesizing through you
they have gaps they want those gaps
filled they trust you to help them fill
those gaps but you're not the only
source they have other people that they
also learn from other people that they
also follow the problem with our world
the problem with the United States in
many ways in my opinion is a lack not of
analysis it's a lack of synthesis people
accept the gaps and they assume what's
happening in the Gap instead of actively
trying to solve the question of what's
happening in the
Gap that's really interesting and I
think super important and again
abstracting it for people it does not
matter what problem you were trying to
think through whether it's Israel Hamas
whether it is uh Ukraine Russia correct
being a better parent getting a
promotion starting a business whatever
uh it's all going to run the same thing
the the important part for me so I use
slightly different vernacular to
describe exactly the same thing so for
me it's frame of reference getting
people to understand that you have a
frame of reference you see the world in
a certain way you are a wash in biases
you're a wash in certain emotions that
you have to things so the way I explain
to an entrepreneur is your job as a CEO
is the world is a bunch of dots to your
point it's data analysis you're getting
a bunch of data in but it doesn't
actually tell the story by itself you
have to connect those dots now much like
when we look up into the night sky for
Millennia people saw animals and humans
and all kinds of things in the shapes of
the Stars it's not really there right
those are just dots but we cannot help
but from our frame of reference of being
a human and the things that we know
overlay things onto those patterns in
the same way that you'll see a dog in
the clouds or the shape of England which
has happened to me many times because my
wife happens to be from the UK so uh we
will begin to see patterns in the dots
and as a thinker again regardless of
what you're aiming at thinking at that's
your job your job is to connect the dots
but you have to be hyper aware that
emotions will make dots feel like they
connect that don't actually con and if
you don't distrust yourself you'll be
like oh yeah that's a dog face oh yeah
that's whatever Aries pulling back bow
and arrow in the sky and people just
yeah 100% that's what it is I I see the
picture in the dots and to think through
a novel problem well what you have to do
is really step back and go cool I see a
picture in this I really have a strong
take on what this is but I know better I
cannot trust my emotions they are
probably making dos feel like they
connect that don't actually connect I
need to step back because you have to
have that certainty to move forward
right otherwise you just be forever
analysis paralysis so I need a narrative
that allows me to move forward but I
need to also occasionally check in and
be like I need to welcome disconfirming
evidence because and this is a part we
haven't talked about yet that I think is
insanely important and dear anybody
listening that wants to think well
through a problem you must have a goal
first yeah like for me the the way I
think about when I get invited to be on
a podcast is no one can make me say
something I don't believe is true and so
M go on any podcast like the only thing
they can hope to do is like really like
snip snip snip and like rearrange things
in an order um I am admittedly easy to
make sound crazy out of context but if
somebody watches the whole thing like
it's gonna it's going to be there so
understanding that okay um I can go
listen to things that I think are
outright lunacy that you know whether
it's far right far left whatever I it's
not going to poison my mind to hear it
to your point it's going to help me
triangulate when I understand where
people disagree what they're fighting
over and then that helps me refine the
way that I'm connecting the dots so that
I can hopefully get closer and closer to
the truth but the truth is my goal now
why the truth how did the truth become
my norstar when I'm looking at something
like this because to me the truth has
utility which completely reveals who I
am and what I'm about I'm about
something being useful now then it begs
a question useful in what way and I
think it is important to Define that and
I think people should have goals that
are honorable to me the best I can do
and if somebody has a better answer I'm
super here for it but the best I can do
so far is to say all humans ought value
judgment entirely all humans ought to
strive to maximize human flourishing and
minimize human suffering as much as
possible I don't have a better one than
that that's clearly not perfect The
Human Experience does not seem to be
perfect but at least if you're doing
that like your real aim is hey as much
as I can I'm going to try to alleviate
human suffering I'm going to try to
elevate people we can get into
definitions of what that stuff is about
I think it's beyond the scope of what
we're saying now but what I'm trying to
get people to understand is you have to
have a goal there needs to be a thing
that you can state that you are steering
towards so that as you redraw your dots
you're constantly asking what is more
true in that when I look at this problem
with this particular connection of dots
it allows me to more accurately predict
the outcome of my action
once you can predict the outcome of your
actions if I do this I will get this
outcome that to me tells me that you're
closer to ground truth that's why as we
learn more about physics we're able to
do more things so Newtonian physics
first gave us the ability to land on the
moon but it didn't give us the ability
to do GPS for that we needed einan
physics so it's understanding that o as
we get closer to truth and even Einstein
said well we still don't fully
understand it and as we do we'll be able
to do more things whether that's
harnessing the power of an entire sun or
an entire our galaxy whatever like as we
understand physics better we will be
able to do those things so that's that
is a very tangible example of the modern
world was born out of us getting closer
to ground truth now when you were one
step removed at Newtonian physics you
still could do amazing things because
you getting close enough to something
true that you were able to do certain
things but there will be a wall and so
as your ability to predict the outcome
of your actions breaks down you should
immediately go ah interesting the way I
have drawn these dots is not accurate
enough for me to get to that next stage
and so what piece of this is broken and
this is where I find people don't even
realize they have a frame of reference
so I never think to like recheck like
hey what's wrong with my way of thinking
because things are not I'm not making
progress towards my goal and therefore
by definition I'm doing something quote
unquote wrong which people are going to
get hung up on that word but I'm doing
something wrong and therefore I have to
update my set of beliefs in order to
make additional progress so I love that
you again in in the way that I love
sitting with you you bring up a million
like I mean at least five different ways
of looking at this question so what I'm
going to focus in on is is this idea of
truth because what you call
truth I associate with fact and fact and
Truth seem like they should be the same
thing but they're different things
because truth includes facts and beliefs
whereas facts excludes beliefs
and that I think was what you were
getting at with the end of your question
when you said that everybody looks
through a lens of what they believe so
for example I mean to go back to physics
as an example right cernus was the one
who suggested for the first time that
maybe the Earth revolves around the Sun
everything before that was that
everything revolved around the earth
right that was the facts that were known
at the time even the world's astronomers
at the time were able to map out the
night sky and sunrises and sunsets and
seasons
back to the Earth and then the Roman
Catholic Church also aligned with the
same belief system everything revolves
around the earth so the truth and the
predominant set of facts at the time
pointed to the to the idea that
everything revolved around the earth
cernus proposed something different that
wasn't actually a provable fact until
Newton right whatever that was 100 years
later 50 years later so here you have
what you're getting at facts are
constantly being Unearthed wored and
proven to be true because prior to it
being a fact it's a hypothesis it's an
idea but belief systems don't change as
quickly as facts and belief systems play
into the idea of what is a truth
right uh some people believe that we
should be making the world a better
place by removing human suffering the
Buddha believe that you it seems like
that's something that's very important
to you other people believe that you can
make the world a better place by
increasing the amount of success in the
world that suffering will always be
there so you can't really like don't try
to stop the suffering Instead try to
account for more success because the
more success in the world the more the
suffering will be raised right there
will be suffering always there will be
poor always that's a very Christian
principle right so you've you've got
these different belief sets that inform
the truth that people then move from for
me the utility is less about trying to
get people to align on a singular truth
and it's more about understanding each
individual each individual's perceived
truth and then using that position as
your temporary frame of reference in
order to have a productive conversation
or productive exchange with that
individual Why argue with a Muslim Why
argue with a Buddhist Why argue with a
Christian Why argue with a rabbi Why
argue at all if you can just adopt
temporarily and understand their frame
of reference and then get them to do the
produ thing that you're there to get
them to do that's the utility part for
me but do you think that's different
than the way I see it I don't know that
it's different but I wanted to call it
out specifically because if it's
different I want to learn from you where
you where you see it similar where you
see it differently but I also like one
of the places where people quickly learn
to agree or disagree with me is that I
take a
very binary approach to relationships I
see all relationships as being
transactional
it doesn't mean that you're transacting
money or transacting time or transacting
favors but there has to be something of
value that you're offering in exchange
for something that you value from the
other person when a relationship is not
transactional there's no reason to
invest in the relationship so for me I
find that the way I maximize the
transactional value of relationships is
not by trying to get other people to see
my point of view it's by me adopting and
adapting to their point of view first
and then if they're the kind of person
that I assess as being open to a
different point of view I'll present it
but there are plenty of people who are
not open to a different point of view
and if you want to have a productive
transactional exchange with that kind of
person you just roll with their frame of
reference yeah I think that's very wise
um that to me it's interesting so all of
these are linguistic traps that I think
eat up so much of the planet and so many
times when I hear people arguing on
podcasts I'm like oh man I wish I could
be the Arbiter because there there is an
idea that I use a lot which is um I want
to know if I accurately understand this
person's base assumption and what I have
found in my life is when two intelligent
well-meaning people think that the other
person is crazy it is because they
either have different values or
different base assumptions values have
to do with what the world ought to be in
their opinion and B assumptions have to
do with a Mis uh a disagreement over
what is true and I'm not a believer in
posttruth world or Posta world but I
think anybody who thinks that the truth
is self-evident is a fool and the truth
is brutally difficult to get to and for
evidence of that we still don't
understand physics not all the way so
it's like we understand it well enough
to do some amazing things but we don't
understand it all the way and so if we
can all agree to Max Plank's quote that
science does not Advance one Insight at
a time but rather one funeral at a time
it's because people can't to your point
adjust what they think is
true that's crazy and you said I think
beliefs don't update as quickly as facts
it's like yeah okay so people end up
getting trapped by their frame of
reference which has a whole host of
baggage but also people just get lost in
work words they don't take the time to
define the words and even if they do oh
my God it is so hard to get somebody to
like really understand what we mean by
this one of the most important things my
wife and I ever did to make our
relationship last was Define a small set
of key words that were like this is what
this word means now and forever for us
and so it became easier to navigate a
relationship so I think people get lost
in that probably more effective than
people getting lost and defining every
term would be to say what's your goal I
think that's incredibly important and
when people can say what their goal is
in a single sentence with no
parentheticals and run-ons just like a
really tight concise 25 to 35W sentence
it's like this is what I'm trying to
achieve okay word so if I know that's
what you're trying to achieve and you're
telling me to do this thing which sounds
absolutely crazy now this is where I
come in as a writer and I say huh if I
were writing this person as a character
because they think they're the hero
right no one thinks they're the villain
ever right so they think they're the
hero what would they need to believe is
true in order for the hero to want to do
this thing in order to accomplish that
goal and then I'm doing what you advise
which is I'm now stepping inside their
frame of reference and I'm saying oh my
God okay cool and so I'll just ask
people is the following base assumption
how you view the world and they either
say yes and I'm like okay wow I I me not
agree with you but now I understand you
and now I can actually steal man your
argument I can say this is what you
believe and I can say where we're
colliding is this you have this base
assumption and I have that base
assumption or you have this goal which
is hey don't worry about suffering
everyone's going to suffer suffering is
fine and I'm all about trying to
alleviate human suffering and so now at
least we actually know where we're
colliding and man if I could give that
gift to people again regardless of what
you're trying to accomplish and so one
thing I really want to put a fine point
on that you said because I think it's
really brilliant is not trying to
persuade people instead trying to
understand them once you understand them
then it's like oh wow okay now I have a
rough approximation of at least the
caricature of that's the wrong word
because that has too much baggage I have
at least a low Fidelity sense of your
world view and so now you become a lot
more predictable to me which means I'm a
lot closer to ground truth of who you
are and at least I can my predictive
engine doesn't break anymore so there's
two things I want to I want to present
in that accompany what your what your
statement is right there right the first
is that you present to people the idea
like here is what I understand your base
assumption to
be there's a concept in Espionage that
we call priming or analytical overlay to
go back to your conversation about
seeing dogs and the Stars very similar
things right analytical overlay is when
someone's
predominant understanding through life
experience in education overlays how
they view all new information right so
they have a a set of Base assumptions
you can in a low Fidelity way identify
what those base assumptions are because
they went to a private school in London
or because they grew up in Boston or
because they grew up with a military
family you can start to create an
assessment of what their base
assumptions might be and then you can
test those base assumptions to verify
and confirm that your assessment is
accurate or inaccurate ultimately
leading to a point where you understand
why they see a German Shepherd in the
Sky versus an English terrier in the sky
right because of their analytical
overlay combine that with this idea of
priming priming is when you present an
idea and by presenting the idea they
have no option but
to have that idea essentially incept
into their brain it's like when I look
at you and I say Tom whatever you do
right now don't think of the color
orange I've already thought of the color
orange of course right and you thought
of color and you thought of thoughts
right so you've been primed in multiple
areas so now when I follow up in that
question I say Tom real quick tell me
what your favorite juice
is you have to fight not to say orange
juice right even if it's not true even
if it's not true you've been primed so
what jumps to mind is what you were just
primed to believe what you were just
primed to say so when it comes to this
world of information this world of fast
moving High Velocity high volume
information you can be primed
and then immediately be confirmed
because they'll Prime you with
information ask you a follow-up question
how do you feel about this and now we're
going to Jane on camera 2 and Jane what
do the what does the audience think
about this right well the audience just
got primed to think exactly what you
just told them to think so when you put
them on the spot and you and you force
them in a high velocity situation you're
going to have a high likelihood of the
primed thought being what comes right
back so when you ask somebody I is your
my understanding that your base
assumption is this you're doing two
things one you're priming them of what
you believe their base assumption to be
so even if you're 80% accurate 10 20%
inaccurate they've now been primed with
what you told them you understand their
base assumption to be so they're their
natural inclination is going to be to
agree with things that maybe aren't
fully accurate but they feel on the spot
to answer and they've been primed and
it's it's within easy grasp for them to
just regurgitate it and say it out loud
that's part of priming if you then Prime
them about a base assumption that you've
assumed through an analysis of their own
background you also have this idea of
analytical overlay on top of that so you
you run the risk of getting a
confirmation that isn't fully
accurate if um how do you avoid that
like if you really want to know what's
true you're not trying to paint somebody
in a corner however people usually don't
know what's driving their own thinking
correct and so you have to help them by
saying here's what it sounds like you're
saying and that's I think you nailed you
nailed a fact right there and then a
truth which like I said facts and truths
for me aren't the same thing the fact is
people don't know what they're thinking
absolute fact even though you and I as
much time as we spend thinking think we
know what we're thinking we still don't
really know what we're thinking that's
why I'm sure that you spend time just
thinking and you jot down notes and you
review your notes and then you're like
that's not quite right you've done it on
this podcast already where you're like
that that caricature is not the right
word I have to pick that apart even more
here in real time even as I say it you
are able to think about thinking in real
time when most people can't so then you
have to understand that most people
don't know what they're thinking and
don't realize they don't know what
they're thinking so for sure they are
they don't know what they're saying
because they can't even think at the
speed that they can talk you have to
build that into your assessment of
people always going back to the idea
that if you are trying to win in life if
you are trying to win in business and in
entrepreneurialism if you're trying to
succeed it's not about trying to get
other people to learn that's your truth
your truth is I have to help them that's
your truth I have to help them think I
have to help them say what they're
thinking the fact is they don't know
what they're thinking how could you
possibly help somebody to say what
they're thinking if they don't even know
what they're thinking instead you're
helping them to say something so that
they can get off the because this is
really uncomfortable to them to think
about
thinking that was a big Whirlpool of
malstrom ideas did it did it make sense
to you it does but I still have the
follow-up question which is um I don't
I'm not trying to plant an idea in their
mind I I will say this there are times
where I am trying to plant an idea in
their mind it's what I call trapping
somebody with their own value system
which is very effective and I should do
like a whole class on that because oh my
God however in this case I'm I'm trying
to refine my own toolkit and help
anybody listening develop their toolkit
around thinking through a novel problem
well and for that I need to be able to
actually really just understand the
situation I'm really imagine I'm not
trying to plant anything in anybody's
mind I'm really just trying to figure
out where are you at but people will
talk in circles they will be and run on
sentences I get into this all the time
where I will finally just have to say to
people hey like that is the world's
longest S I asked you for a single
sentence on this you've been talking for
three minutes so um then I'll start
saying what I think I hear you saying is
this is that accurate and so we have a
thing here at impact Theory where I'll
say I want to get to the point where you
say the exact words you understand my
position perfectly and you'll usually
get to like yeah you've got the Essence
no no no so I'm missing something what
part am I missing so anyway how do you
without planting something in somebody's
mind or priming them how do you unearth
what they're
thinking I the utility of information
for me is to never disclose the full
extent of the information I understand
it's something we call in in Espionage
terms we call it information superiority
even in your marriage so my marriage is
is a different animal because in my
marriage my wife and I we try to operate
a level of transparency y mainly because
we can both we've both been trained to
see non-transparency all right so give
me both angles so one where first give
me the I'm trying to conceal okay but
then I'll want to go through when you're
in transparency mode with your wife or
anybody else what does that look like so
when I'm trying to conceal I'm in
receive mode and I'm I'm I'm I validate
I authenticate I confirm right this is
what you believe internally you're like
okay I think he believes this how do you
verify it I I ask a follow-up related
question let's say something that's 10%
different to see if I get what I the
answer I expect to get and then I'll
push myself another 10% and another 10%
until I find the boundary and I'm
getting it wrong right so when somebody
says something like you know uh I think
it's so crazy that Dunkin' Donuts puts
you know uh makes donut sandwiches right
I also think it's crazy that Dunkin
Donuts makes donut sandwiches but are
they saying it's crazy cool or are they
saying it's crazy sick and gross so I've
got to ask a question that's 10% off
right like oh do you do you think that
it's just too sweet or do you think that
like do you think this the sweetness
goes well with the Savory and then
eventually you'll get to the place where
they're just like oh it's just so gross
why would you put meat between two
Donuts ah now I know where you're at
rather than coming out and saying are
you saying that you think it's gross or
are you saying that you think it's cool
because as soon as I ask that direct
question they now know that I don't know
what they're thinking up until that they
assumed that what they communicated was
crystal clear I don't want to give them
the advantage of knowing what I do and
don't understand instead I can create a
whole conversation which means I can
create a whole relationship a whole
series of transactions I can build what
we call called social capital or social
currency by engaging in a conversation
about something as low stakes as
doughnut sandwiches and that's what's
really valuable when if you think about
somebody who's trying to build
relationship someone who's trying to
build a develop a business relationship
for a client someone who's trying to uh
uh build a a promotional uh argument
with their boss the thing that you need
the most is to just have some sort of
capital transactional exchange with the
person in control of that fate the
client the customer the Romantic partner
the boss the way that you build that is
through a series of transactions where
they feel validated authenticated and
heard if you can make them feel like you
understand
them they just have to feel it it
doesn't have to be true and we know that
the brain accepts emotional decisions
before factual decisions so if you can
make someone feel like you agree with
them even if you don't you're actually
giving them more value than they're
giving you you have control of that
relationship so in in my approach to to
business in my approach to relationships
in my business in my approach to most
Elements of Life I'm trying to
understand where the other person is
coming from without disclosing where I
stand on that topic until I get to a
place where I have enough information
that validates that that where I stand
is close to where they stand and then I
will disclose that and in an effort to
bring that relationship even closer
together right that's how I handle it in
general all right what about when you're
in full transparency mode in full
transparency mode with my wife what I'll
do is I'll overe explain right I will
tell her here's what I'm thinking here's
what I'm feeling here's where I'm coming
from and not only will I tell her what I
understand about my position I will also
tell her about what I don't understand
about my position right so as an example
uh I'm I do a TV show I'm on a TV show
with History Channel it's my second
season I've been traveling for about 5
months now I've got one more month of
travel I travel somewhere between 25 and
35 days at a time oh my God and then I'm
home for 5 days or 10 days right so I'm
missing out on these core months of my
children my 10-year-old son my
six-year-old daughter and at the
beginning of the season they they had a
high tolerance for me being gone they're
accustomed to me traveling they're even
accustomed to be traveling for months at
a time but they're not accustomed to be
traveling for six months months at a
time it's half a year so when I for
Christmas I was home with my wife and
I'm walking her through my feelings
about missing these elements of my
children's lives and I'm I'm telling her
like here's what I know I feel I know I
feel guilty I know I feel sad I know I
miss them I know that I'm doing it to
help build the business and to help
build the brand and to help you know
it's we live in a world where the best
currency is eyeballs and awareness and I
know I'm building all that and I know
I'm building that for them but it still
hurts and I don't know what to do with
the hurt and I feel like I'm letting you
down and I don't even know why I feel
like I'm letting you down because I'm
bringing you a good paycheck and I'm
giving you a good life and I talk to you
as often as I can but I know you're
still suffering because you have anxiety
and because you have you know you you
didn't sign up to be a mom without a dad
there to help you and no matter how many
nannies and cooks and cleaners I hire
it's not the same thing as having a
husband and I just kind of put it in
full transparency mode I frontend load
what I know and what I don't know and
then I let her respond and in that
response what I often find is that some
of the things I don't know become known
because a lot of what I don't know is
tied to how she perceives something but
also when you have somebody that you're
so close to that you can give that level
of
transparency their inputs connect dots
that you couldn't connect previously or
they highlight places where you
connected dots incorrectly and you can
push back on that and you can you can
confirm that and you can find great
comfort and relief when you have those
few people that you can open that level
of transparency
too yeah I uh want that for everyone
when you have somebody like that that
you can trust that is your
equal uh that helps you think through
things that can see things in yourself
that you can't see going back to trying
to more accurately connect the dots even
just from a utilitarian standpoint it's
amazingly helpful um but even just from
a oh my god it feels nice to be seen and
to share a life and all that stuff it it
really is incredible but yeah I find
most people struggle there one they
probably don't know their own edges of
what they understand and what they don't
understand um they don't know how to
process out loud and begin to map out
their own thinking yeah it's uh this
goes back to one of the first things I
said which is people are way too easy to
confuse it's just people have a really
hard time with nuanced positions and
then even if they can sort of touch it
for a second it then goes away and they
need a caricature accurately use this
time uh to hold on to and that's the fun
thing about an impression or an actual
caricature drawing is with you know very
little detail I can convince you that
that is who you think it is like if I'm
doing a caricature of you if I get the
hair right like you know yeah people G
be like oh yeah got it um so it's really
interesting how you can with very little
information however it's not super
accurate and so yeah if people can't get
to the nuanced part of it they in real
trouble so here's here's where I would
love your input for sure
so I was just telling you that everyday
spy crossed the million dollar Mark yes
and I'm very excited congratulations
thank very much amazing man I'm very
excited to run top 9% of all businesses
it's an incredible feeling it's amazing
and it's incredible to know that we're
we're really just starting facts and
it's it's so I'm beyond the moon in
terms of excitement but at the same time
a a part of how we got there
is not by trying to create truths for
people it's not like we were trying to
uh push against the predominant way of
thinking instead what we were doing was
presenting what we believed to be facts
here's factual systems here's factual
processes here's factual information
that we have seen work for us that I've
have seen work for me that may work for
you or may work for your business or may
work for your relationship or may work
for your health and your Fitness right
but we always presented it we always
targeted and marketed to people where
they were according to their own
existing current beliefs their own
existing current truths their own
existing current analytical overlay we
primed them with thoughts in our
marketing campaigns we we essentially
reached out to use a a spy a spy concept
we reached out to them where they were
we didn't try to reach out to them
aspirationally to where they were going
we tried to reach out to them where they
were and the reason I say that is
because you know as you seek to share
truth I I admire that I I value that I
honor that I don't intend to build a
business that's trying to share truth as
much as I have found the success of
listening and adapting to where people
are and then entrepreneurially marketing
to them where they are mhm and building
that connection with them where they are
so that you can essentially get into
their head into their mind into their
heart and gain that transactional
exchange that turns into a relationship
that becomes a long-term Customer
because the customer will do what you
ask them to do to get the outcomes that
are predictable only if they do the work
that you've asked them to do is there a
flaw in that is it is it is there a
layer of evolution that you can add to
that I I'm I am now asking completely
selfishly um well it's interesting so
you I don't know that there is a layer
to that that isn't individual
so uh when I look at companies that are
perfectly happy to sell people what they
want rather than what they need I get
very jealous because I can't do it and
there's something about my wiring where
I'm only interested in selling you what
I know you actually need because
otherwise I feel like a fake and I
[__] hate that and so I I understand
about myself and this is why I tell
people and and this is self-revelatory
maybe more than it is universally
accurate but it is so true of me I
cannot say anything else and that is all
that matters in life is how you feel
about yourself when you're by yourself
again that's a confession so all I care
about is how I feel about myself I do I
won't say I don't care about what other
people think but if I feel like I've
really honored my values and I've showed
up and I fought for the things that I
believe are right if the world were to
um at some point misunderstand me and
try to malign me or whatever that
wouldn't damage me I would be very sad
because it will disrupt my ability to
build my business but I would think of
it like that like oh this is really
messing up my ability to build a
business because people have the wrong
idea about who I am and what I'm trying
to accomplish and I believe in what I'm
trying to do and trying to accomplish or
if the world suddenly was like um help
helping to eliminate human suffering and
uh increasing human flourishing that's
ass bro and like why are you pursuing
that then I'd be like all right you guys
are out of your [__] minds so I have
such an internal anchor on that is that
just being objectively what all say is
true I know we use that word very
differently um but that to me is the
intersection of ought and is ought being
a value judgment and is being I actually
think that's how the world works that if
you Empower people to navigate novel
problems well they will based on the
evolutionary algorithms that run in all
of our minds they will have a
neurological state that I'll call
fulfillment that is the thing people
should be aiming for it's the only
Pleasant feeling that can survive grief
as an example so if you're in grief like
that's going to suck no matter what but
a bowl of ice cream does not give you
happiness in the middle of grief in the
way that fulfillment still gives you an
anchor of I'm proud of who I am even
though right now the loss of my wife or
my mother or whatever is just it's
grueling
so that that's is an not to me and
that's what I'm aiming for I'm trying to
help as many people exist in that
neurological State as often as possible
now where that gets complicated is where
because of frame of reference the thing
that makes you feel good about yourself
is something that creates like atrocity
and hey welcome back to the the Israel
Hamas conversation so it it's that is
really fascinating but I don't think
there's a way to escape that because
such is the nature of the algorithms
running in the human mind which is why
these problems have no sort of absolute
solution but I think that there are Ways
to Think through these problems well so
we'll get to that in a second but to to
just officially answer your question you
will Thrive so if you can do that from a
business perspective and sell people
what they want you will do very well
because people will pay for what they
want all day long um what I fear is that
at some point
the money won't solve the problem you
will start looking to but are we
actually helping people if you're at all
wired the way that I am that question is
going to occur to you aggressively but I
look at people I'll let them remain
namess but I look at some of the big
names and this will often happen with
sales guys and they make a ton of money
a ton of money but I cringe I could not
do it no matter how much money you told
me I could make the way that would make
me feel about myself I couldn't do it
and that holds me
back but since I believe the only thing
that really matters is how I feel about
myself that's been my life that all the
money in the world if I don't like who I
am that's a one-way path to Suicide so
uh I don't want to be rich and killing
myself that that just doesn't strike me
as interesting in the slightest and yet
people take that life path so anyway
that that for me would be the only thing
and I don't know if you're wired like
I'm so maybe that's just like no I'll be
fine I don't know know what's funny is
uh is one of the things and I find that
entrepreneurialism has been the best
teacher possibly ever because the the
market teaches you lessons oh yes my
friend customers teach you lessons
experimentation teaches you lessons and
one of the big lessons that I feel like
I've learned is the the the truth behind
the 8020 rule right and and how powerful
that 8020 rule really is and when I
think of it specifically what I've seen
it play out in my audience base is that
when I try to when I try really hard to
Market what people
need I have of 100% of of buyers 80%
won't complete it correct 20% will well
80% probably more won't even buy it yeah
that's for sure that's the first level
right 80% won't buy it 20% will of the
20% that does buy it 80% won't finish it
20% will now there I have solutions for
you and then and then but second that at
the same time when I AB test that
against an 8020 rule what they want the
same mathematical principle RS out of
the 100% of people that buy it 80% don't
complete it 20% do so I bring it up not
as a as a lesson for me as much as
something that I have found to be
absolutely critical to reaching the
point where I am in my business is
understanding the mathematical
principles the the datadriven facts that
exist behind sales in marketing that
whether you Market to what they want or
whether you Market to what they need
there may be different conversions at
first but then when it comes to the
actual adopters human behavior Reigns
out 80% don't complete it 20% will so
you have to have a plan for recapturing
the 80% that don't complete it because
if they don't complete it they don't get
the outcome if they don't get the
outcome you're not changing any lives so
I mean the mission of our company is to
use spy education to break barriers so
just like you I am very much in the
business of breaking barriers if we're
not breaking barriers we're not doing
business sales sales a sales right money
is just a way of counting the number of
lives that we're touching because it's
very hard to get people to raise their
hand and say you changed my life you
changed my life it's much easier to be
like we changed a million dollars worth
in lives this year we're going to try to
change $3 million in lives next year
it's something you can actually measure
but what's fascinating to me is that
the the moral quandry of how you Market
what you Market what you sell is often
times uh less relevant than how you
drive people towards the outcome that
you're trying to get them to achieve
because once they taste outcome they
become lifetime customers but you got to
get them to outcome first yeah you have
to get them to outcome and very quickly
yes yeah getting people to outcome
quickly is the name of the game that
that when I said oh I have a solution
for you there that's exactly the
solution is you have to figure out how
to class something how to get them to
feel something as a win very quickly um
You probably have 60 minutes if you
don't get somebody to feel something
directionally obviously you're not going
to get them to the final outcome but if
you can get them directionally to feel
like oh wow I had a little victory in
the right way pointed in the right
direction uh if you can't get that to
them quickly then they just won't stick
with it much to my dismay but such as
human nature now we could really derail
on that but um I want to come back to
Israel and Hamas so this is um this is
going to be a really good case test for
I think we did a pretty good job of
laying out how to Think Through very
difficult problems um and this is a
maybe the intractable problem of our
times and so I seriously doubt that you
and I will come to a a three-step plan
that they can Implement and look we saw
World Peace everybody and get the the
Nobel Peace Prize for this podcast
though that will be the aim let's try it
yes right so uh but I do want to deploy
this now as as we go through this so
this is not a topic that I'm deeply
familiar with um but I really believe
it's important for people to um show
their
work what I mean by that is on this
podcast what I'm constantly doing is
showing people how I think through
problems and all the success that I've
had is this thing that I do live on the
podcast this is how I encounter a
difficult problem in my marriage this is
how I encounter a difficult problem in
business and I go through this thing um
and so it is what we laid out earlier
all right so we know that step one is
mapping the terrain so walk me through
what is going on so when you take a look
at the battlefield here not the not the
literal battlefield but the the
landscape of Israel and Palestine what
you have is something that in many ways
goes all the way back to biblical days
Abraham who's the father of all Nations
had two sons Ishmael and Isaac Ishmael
became the father of Islam Isaac became
the father of Judaism and on to become
the father of Christianity so the
conflict that exists between Palestine a
Muslim country or m a Muslim uh group
and Israel a Jewish largely
predominantly Jewish group essentially
is the the generational ongoing conflict
between Isaac and ishma and is there so
forgive me dear listeners but I think of
this is a
story uh and a very powerful story but
one designed to convey things at each
branch so between the brothers I have to
imagine there was a tale that we learn
about each brother each brother
represents something what do the
brothers represent so I I don't I am not
creative enough I think to speak to the
literary Jordan Peterson no for real
like this is his whole shtick like
showing how basically modern Humanity
can be read through the lens of
religious traditions and what those sto
tell you most people haven't read his
book maps of meaning it is unbelievably
good uh anyway so okay so that part we
don't have that's we have a DOT point
that has a gap maybe we won't be able to
fill it in here but I get your point so
we've got the two brothers they create
two different traditions and they both
lay they both have valid claim all the
way back to the biblical a valid claim
of what a valid claim all the way back
to biblical and or chonic tradition to
being tied to the father of all Nations
okay what does that matter because for
both of them what they're what they're
really trying to say is that they have a
right to survive in in equality that
they are tied to the father of all
Nations but does this come down to hey
we're tied to the father of all Nations
and that manifests as dirt and so this
dirt and rock is rightfully mine uh I
think that's the oversimplified way that
the Western world has is it
oversimplified or is that really what
like at some point this manifests as
something either ideological or tangible
so the the place where it becomes
tangible and ideological is in the end
of World War II at the end of World War
II the Jewish diaspora that had been
hunted and killed by the Nazi party
needed a a a country of their own and
because other countries in the world
didn't want to take on the refugees they
essentially took them all to the
Palestinian state that is now known as
Israel
and was and the West the Western allies
granted the boundaries of Israel and
said this is where the Jews should live
this is where Jerusalem exists this is
where the this is this is their Homeland
where they were born where they came
from going back to the brothers going
back to the brothers but the Palestinian
Muslims were already there they had
never been displaced from their Homeland
so by having the West create a nation
state create boundaries and everything
for a group of religious people Jews
that were persecuted during World War I
now all of a sudden the West defined the
organizational uh National structure of
Israel and that's where the conflict
really started because now you had
Western allies saying this is the Jewish
State the Jewish State defining itself
as Israel the Palestinian diaspora who
were now being forced from their own
Homeland land saying but we were already
here like this is this is Jerusalem is
the city where a where uh Muhammad
ascended into heaven like this is a holy
place for us too and so the West was
just like well then you can both share
it we're going home right we got we got
a party after VE day we're done here and
that's where everything started from
there you also then had Western Powers
funding and fueling the economic success
of Israel and by the way I just want
people listening at home
uh you are providing a very fast
painting I know enough to know that
there's you know God only knows how much
history of conflict before 1948 where
these boundaries are laid and all that
stuff this I I just want people to
understand this is an exercise on how to
think through a difficult problem this
is not a um a one for one accurate
representation of everything you will
need a far longer video from experts in
this field we we go into this
conversation fully understanding that um
but I do think to the initial framing of
this episode I think it's very important
to understand what I'm trying to do uh I
think putting your head down is the
wrong move at this particular moment in
history there are probably times that
come and go throughout history where it
is okay to put your head down and for
the first 40 years of my life I had my
head down and it worked out wonderfully
uh but this moment feels different now
that could be a mirage maybe it's just
my age and everybody sort of pokes their
head up at this point in their age and
starts thinking the way that I'm
thinking I don't know but this moment
really does feel different to me and
we'll get into Ai and some other things
later I think there are a lot of threats
on the board right now um certainly AI
technology social media all of that we
talked about velocity and volume of
information earlier all of that's a play
so anyway I just want to set that stage
so the comment doesn't waste time with
like the boring [__] like because yes
simplistic Viewpoint here from the
setting of the table we'll talk okay but
what do you do now right um and what I
really hope because I I think that the
comments are going to end up being a big
part of what makes this episode um
useful to a larger audience so I hope
that we can eliminate some of the
more I don't want people to get bogged
down in the wrong thing so yes many
details to talk about we just need to
set a quick table so that then we can
talk about things like hey when humans
have a historical conflict over who has
a right to the land without getting lost
in the minutia of that how do you move
forward and that just again so we're
setting the table sorry no so it's fair
so I'll I'll set the table faster too no
no no I don't need you to set it faster
because I know no matter how much you do
we're we're not going to get there the
more detail you have give it to me for
sure okay fair enough so so then what
ended up happening was now we have uh as
as the West places uh the Jewish
diaspora into Israel and and and
supports the establishment of of a
Jewish State we then also have the
responsibility of the West in fueling
the economy for the Jewish State because
you can't I mean we did the same thing
in Japan we're going to rebuild there's
economic benefits to the United States
in rebuilding foreign countries there's
economic benefits in having allies that
you help economically rebuild so fast
forward till today and now you have
Israel had this massive boost
economically from Western partners and
Western allies when they were placed in
Israel those
the Palestinian counterparts did not
have access to that Financial benefit
that the Israelis did so there's like
you said Decades of conflict between
Israelis and Palestinians and there's
everything's documented out there and
there's a thousand ways that you can
look at it interpret it and whatever
else but in the end what what happened
was the the Palestinians through the
lens of most Muslim countries became
oppressed became ostracized from their
own like their own land their own Nation
where they could Thrive and to build an
economy and build a political
establishment and build a legacy for
their future because that land was being
supported and developed by the Jewish
State and the Jewish State and the
Muslim State just didn't want to get
along for a number of reasons that that
we don't really have a say in because we
didn't live there at the time right and
that's how that's how
interpret uh the many years of
historical conflict between Palestinians
and Israelis in that
country the place where we have to fast
forward this to is till
1997 in
1987 Hamas became a political group that
was supporting Palestinians in their
fight to resist what was perceived to be
Israeli oppression Hamas became the more
aggressive group versus the Palestinian
Authority which became what's known as a
secular group or a non-religious group
and those became the two the two
political powers vying for support from
the Palestinian people and at the time
in 1987 the vast majority of that
support went to the Palestinian
Authority not to Hamas hamas's promise
at the time was we will destroy the
Israeli country and we will return the
entire country back to the Muslim people
not a religious War they weren't going
after killing Jews they were trying to
destroy
Israel not that it makes it that much
better but at least to clarify what
their Ambitions were in
1987 nobody determined that Hamas was a
terrorist organization in 1987 despite
their claim despite their promise to
eradicate Israel in
1997 following major terrorist attacks
inside the United States the peak being
the Timothy McVey bombing uh of Oklahoma
in Oklahoma City the United States
became very focused on terrorism and
counterterrorism and in 19 1987 they
created the terrorist watch list or the
foreign terrorist organization list and
in that list they listed every Muslim
extremist group as a terrorist
organization on that list Hamas was
included so at that moment in time in
1997 based on what was happening in the
United States in their struggle with
extremism they targeted Muslim extremism
as one of the other one of the many
extremisms that they would list as
terrorist organizations that's why even
today the United States lists Hamas as a
terrorist group where most of the rest
of the world does not there's even
country like there's only 12 countries
total that that list Hamas as a
terrorist organization and in many ways
it's because those 12 countries there's
11 countries Take the Lead they follow
the lead of the United States the UN as
an organization does not list Hamas as
terrorist so in 1997 Hamas becomes a
terrorist group but there this terrorist
group that also has a political arm
that's supporting and taking care of the
Palestinian people within
Gaza that's already kind of a mess that
becomes complicated right Palestine
can't create a standing army they can't
create their own standing economy they
can't create foreign trade they can't
create anything significant because they
don't have they're not recognized as a
nation so a few Muslim countries like
Qatar and and Saudi Arabia and Egypt
recognize the Palestinian people but not
the Palestinian State and everybody
recognizes the right of the Palestinians
to a state but nobody wants to say what
that state is going to be so that
becomes a mess that most of the first
world doesn't even follow doesn't really
care about until things start blowing up
in Israel and Palestine October 7th
2023 this group known as Hamas based out
of Gaza conducts this massive incursion
the the most doctrinally correct word is
it was an incursion across a border
within one country closest to a civil
war much closer to a civil war than an
attack from a foreign Nation right they
carry out this incursion that uses
terrorist tactics terrorist tools but
also targets military targets for a
political goal that has been stated and
consistent since
1987 now we live in this world where
what is this thing that's happening the
United States labels the group as a
terrorist group however all humanitarian
Aid that we send to Palestine has to go
through Hamas like they control the
politics they control the governance
they control the hospitals not terrorist
Al-Qaeda never controlled hospitals
right that's it's it's not as clear as
we think it is but it's hard to get that
Nuance across with the velocity and
volume of information so now we live in
this world where velocity and volume of
information make it so that we all see
the dead B and the the crying children
and the dying women on the Palestinian
side but we also read about the
atrocities that were executed against
these Israelis in a surprise attack on
October 7th we're faced with all the
information and there's no clarity as to
what's really the Nuance what's really
the the battlefield what are we really
looking at here so you've got Israel
trying to counter what they know is a is
a threat to their National sovereignty
but they've also got a problem with
group that was created because of the
oppression they put on the Palestinian
people and that's that is what the group
States is their whole their whole core
purpose the reason they exist at all is
because of that oppression so you've got
this this absolute mess that the world
is watching play out dayto day but at
the same time the world isn't invested
enough to actually try to resolve the
conflict how often are you checking your
credit score afraid rate of identity
theft or account breaches we all use the
internet every single day for important
things like Personal Banking and remote
work so why not protect yourself with
our sponsor Aura Aura is an all-in-one
cyber security service that keeps you
safe online AA identifies data Brokers
exposing your info and submits opt out
requests on your behalf Ora also
monitors your credit tracks your
passwords for data breaches and secures
your online activity with VPN and anti
malware protection you can try Aura for
free for 2 weeks by clicking the link in
the description or scanning the QR
[Music]
code okay um so one I want to
acknowledge that that is a sketch from a
perspective um again speaking to the
comment section right now um of course
there are going to be different
perspectives on that I don't know this
well enough to feel like I have a
perspective Ive but I will lay out a few
things that I am aware of um as a way of
filling in additional color to your
point about um trying to triangulate
based on opposing viewpoints and I think
yours is a from the different voices
that I've heard yours is relatively
sedate there are people that are far
sort of harder on the Palestinian side
though I'd say you lean Pro Palestinian
I don't know if that feels right to you
um but that seems reasonable you're
pretty middle of the road but if you
have a lean it's that way um so some of
the other ships that I've heard by way
of putting dots that that people will
have to connect as they try to build a
narrative that creates the emotion that
allows them to have a way of thinking
how to move forward would be okay you
mentioned the Jews are coming out of the
Holocaust you've just had six million
people in the diaspora literally at an
industrial level um killed in
unimaginably horrific ways and I can
only imagine you started this by saying
like they're able to trace all of this
back to the brothers and the split and
and the way that that sort of goes and
you mentioned compasses earlier and if
you get off by three degrees in the
beginning doesn't seem like much but you
know a thousand years later uh there's a
huge Gulf between you which is very much
what this feels like I bring that up to
say that um you really can go back and
back and back on who owns the land you
can go back and back and back on who did
who wrong and so I'm trying to find like
where it all started is probably not
super fruitful um but there if you're
the Israelis or if you're a Jew post
World War II uh never again we're going
to be strong this time we're going to
build a nation state that nation state
has to be somewhere we go back to the
region of Judea which is where they
derive their name from so to your point
they were um removed from their Homeland
but still very much um spiritually that
probably is is the right word but
there's a thing there where they still
have a massive identity in that region
that they're tied to even all these
years later um also it's my
understanding that there was no official
Palestinian state so it's not like the
Jews went in and took over a state so
the West I'm now guessing I want to be
very clear about sort of where I'm
teleporting myself into the mind of
somebody and when I'm offering what I
think are facts now I am very much
speaking like a writer would speak but
if I'm the west and I'm like me there's
no State here anyway I don't really
fully understand the conflict I can see
bad things coming cuz I'm smart and I
understand humans well enough there's
probably going to be some drama here
which is why the US actually pulls their
support at one point of this whole idea
um but nonetheless it's like well we'll
do it we'll bone out to your point we
want to go celebrate we've just won
World War II um and I don't see a better
solution so let's see what happens um
through all of that there are times
where um a two-state solution has been
proposed the Palestinians reject it
there's the whole notion of from The
River To The Sea they don't believe that
there's any amount of Israel that can
exist I'm using the word Israel very
intentionally as opposed to Jews um this
is where I don't know it well enough to
know if that accur accurately captures
the spirit it certainly accurately
captures the pr that is very much how it
is presented no no no this isn't about
religious difference this is not a
racist thing this is just purely Israel
has occupied our land that is rightfully
ours and we want to get rid of the
nation state of Israel of course
functionally the way that you do that is
by killing people ripping them tearing
them from their land because they will
of course fight back if they were all
just willing to up and leave then sure
but we know that that's not going to
happen so uh multiple times that's
offered and rejected for the reasons
that I just laid out um and you end up
in a position now where um you gave me a
piece that I had not heard before so
it's very interesting because I looked
at this and was like okay uh Israel ends
up thriving economically and Palestine
has not now of course um I'm aware of
the positioning of it's an open air
prison how could they ever hope to you
have these people that um have just
subjugated them and of course the
economy is never going to grow uh what I
had never heard before and it's very
interesting is well the West really
helped them when they were in that nent
fragile place the West helped them get
their feet under them I think it begs a
question what have been doing with the
aid that they've gotten because it's
billions of dollars and so one would
hope that they would be spending that on
infrastructure so anyway this is where I
now start going okay I don't know how
many more pieces it makes sense to put
on the table because I have a base
assumption that now we're just getting
into who's right and who's wrong I have
a base assumption that this will
continue to be an intractable problem if
you are approaching this from right and
wrong which is why again as a headline
reader the Abraham Accords strike me as
very um positive because it was just
human
greed to use a terrible word for
something that maybe isn't bad at all
which is when people are thriving
economically the people feel good you
feel like you have a future you have
hope that your kids lives will be better
than yours and when you get people in
that kind of momentum now they're
pointed in a positive direction so again
I'm leaking my base assumptions here so
my base assumption is you have to give
the Palestinian people a sense of a
future uh that their kids lives would be
better than theirs that you want to fill
them with hope and optimism and all of
that now you're not going to do that
with the who's right and who's wrong now
I happen to have a weird sort of thing
in my life that makes me maybe look at
things a little bit differently again
frame of reference this is bias now but
my wife's family is from Cyprus and for
people that don't know the history of
Cyprus it is freakishly similar to the
Israel Palestine conflict you had Greeks
and Turks living on the same Little
Island if You' never looked it up like
this is not a big place uh living on the
same island and one day in the 70s I
think late 60s early 70s uh the Turks
invade and they cut the island in half
and the people on North side of the
island my wife's family included they're
just stripped of everything this house
isn't yours it was yours Monday morning
when you woke up Monday night it's not
your house we've seen these videos play
out in Israel Palestine so we know this
drama and I mean gut-wrenching as you
can imagine you literally lose
everything in an instant man like I I
can't imagine like if if tonight this
house and everything that I own ceased
to be mine that would be obviously the
most traumatic thing that ever happened
to me in my life so brutal the crazy
thing is that you don't have the same
ongoing Bloodshed between the Greeks and
the Turks and so it makes me ask what is
different because you have the same
sense of the Greeks like that's not
their land to take they have no right to
that land that was our land we were
kicked out of it it's rightfully ours
you can trace it back so much you know
history of Greeks occupying the island
raising it you know from nothingness
taming it all that like I mean the
Greeks have a very long history and so
and I'm sure the Turks would say the
same thing right so even though you have
all of that you have not got the same s
like they've managed to reach
stability so the question becomes what
what is different and this is where it
seems to me that you have to at least be
exploring the ideologies and what's
happening and again you're never going
to get either side to give up their
religion so I for me as I think through
this difficult problem I'm just saying
whatever solution you're going to
propose has to take that off the table
you cannot ask them to go oh the other
person's right their religion is correct
they're not going to do that you can't
ask them to go uh you're right we're
we're just going to move out of Israel
and hand it over they're never going to
do that and given that in 2005 the Jews
pulled out of the West Bank and out of
the Gaza Strip and it didn't solve the
conflict so they even
if another was like hey but if you just
leave this area then everything really
will be fine they don't a reason to
believe like historically just the way
the humans are they're going to be like
no we tried that and it didn't work so
you got to take that off the table so
now it when I think about okay as I tell
entrepreneurs all the time if you have a
difficult problem to solve ask yourself
has anybody solved this problem in the
past and if you want to look at it from
a paride cool look at South Africa what
what did they get right um or look at
some of the countries where a new nation
state was born and
is that the right way to handle this and
then you can start at least mapping out
why those would or wouldn't work and
from what I hear because the first time
I heard of a two-state solution I was
like that makes sense to me do a two
yeah perfect I can't believe I didn't
think of that right and uh and then
everyone's like yeah no nobody considers
that realistic anymore but that feels
like the thing we have to find out that
that is a gap that we'll never be able
to resolve this until we find out why
why having a two-state solution won't
work do you think I'm crazy about that
or because that to me feels like you
have to put your finger on that and say
why doesn't the two-state solution exist
the first argument I think is going to
be Israel has no right to exist they
they occupied this territory and then
I'm like I get
it Cyprus again horrible [__] if you
want to get the the people that I know
and love in tears all you need to do is
talk about that day so I I have seen a
similar heartache up
close but it that it's just that's going
to be militaristic right that's that's
guns death Bloodshed and is that really
a game you want to play when Israel is a
way more accomplished military probably
not do you want it spreading wider in
the region speaking as a guy in America
so discount my opinion because I'm not
in it that sounds horrible to me
um and again let me leak my bias I'm
making the base assumption that we
should be trying to avoid death if if
that isn't on somebody's bingo card
that's where we'll disconnect we'll be
two ships passing night anyway so I put
my finger on that that feels like the
thing that has to be addressed and if
the punchline is from The River To The
Sea all this left is military
so yeah what where where does any of
that thinking go wrong in terms of just
finding the thing that we have to say we
have to understand this thing I don't
know that I would label any of that
thinking as wrong there's a couple of
places where I would I think it's worth
clarifying
so like I mentioned earlier I I tend to
look at everything through a lens of
practicality right value
fact vast versus truth right and you
made a base assumption about me earlier
you tried to verify it that I'm Pro
Palestine I've never I I pull heavy from
my Espionage background and one of the
key things that was taught to me by the
director of CIA by General Petraeus was
you don't disclose your position because
if you just as soon as you disclose your
position you've disclosed your position
I was mentioning that to you earlier
about information superiority right I've
never disclosed my position I should
have asked you 10% questions I will I
will disclose my position for you oh
word right so impact Theory exclusive
for anybody who cares I am actually pro
Israel I am actually
pro-israel but the reason I'm pro-israel
is not what I think people will
understand I am pro-israel because I am
very matter of factly
pro-america I Am pro United States the
country that I think should remain the
dominant superpower in the world is the
United States to Aid the United States
in that
objective we must ensure the survival of
Israel and the Israeli States
practically speaking not ideologically
not based on history and and Justice and
everything else what's happening to the
Palestinian people is an atrocity it's
it's a it's a terrible sad thing that
has forced them into a path of
revolutionary terrorism very similar to
what we saw when when the United States
was rejecting the Civil Rights Movement
when women weren't allowed to vote and
they turned to violence like we've seen
this before and it is it is a sad tragic
thing what's happened to Palestine what
has happened to Palestine what is yet to
happen to Palestine all of that being
acknowledged as an American who wants to
see American Primacy in the future we
have to stand up and support the Israeli
State having a strategic economic and
Military partner like
Israel sit next to our strategic and
Military partner that is Jordan in the
Middle East gives us an
incredible economic and Military
advantage over the entire globe that we
cannot sacrifice ideology aside if we
want to protect American lives we have
to ensure the long-term longevity
support and close relationships with the
Israeli people and with the country of
Israel that's that is my official
position what I find is so sad is that
there are so few pro-israel voices that
are giving any kind of validation to the
Palestinian plight so I want to be one
of those voices that can say we must
partner and support Israel and the way
that we partner and support them is by
finding a way for them to like protect
and and defend themselves without
turning to this kind of Destruction
because as long as they turn down this
path of Destruction they're isolating
themselves from everyone else in the
world and that makes it so that we have
a very hard time standing next to them
as the beacon of freedom in the world we
have a hard time supporting Israel in
the face of everybody else including all
the countries of the United Nation and
NATO who look at us and
say h how can you stand by and let this
happen how can you support this how can
you fund this how can you encourage this
not to mention the corruption challenges
that Israel has that's so closely
aligned with the corruption challenges
of our own past presidential you know
hopefuls and presidents that we're
trying to work through ourselves between
netanyahu's corruption and Trump's
corruption right it's a mess and it's
it's a sad mess but the but the bottom
line practical element here is that
Israel encourages and expands National
Security objectives for the United
States that doesn't mean we should call
Hamas terrorists just because we don't
want to call them revolutionary
terrorists which is really more akin to
what Malcolm X was revolutionary
terrorism right we don't want to go down
that road because it's too nuanced for
the American people instead we're going
to put big Billboards up in major cities
that say
Hamas is not just Israel's problem right
Hamas is your problem too so I say all
that because my conclusion is the same
as your conclusion the world the globe
needs to broker a two-state solution and
in and in order to incentivize that
two-state solution we need to rally and
give the Palestinians that economic
boost that the Israelis got post World
War II let's let find a way to massively
expedite their infrastructure their
their technology their their ability to
self-govern let's give them everything
they need if that means that they want
to have close ties with the Arab world
that's exactly what the Arab world has
wanted forever that's why Saudi Arabia
and Qatar and the UAE rush to the aid of
the Palestinians so let's make that
happen and when when we negotiate land
let's find a way to make sure that
they're neighboring a Arab Ally like
Jordan or Egypt let's find a way to make
that happen let's make it a world
problem instead of saying it's their
problem because every pair of brothers
who has ever had an argument over
business they've needed an arbitrator to
help them they've needed the help of
others to come to a meaningful way of
resolving their conflict I'm not trying
to oversimplify it but I am saying like
a strong Israel is in America's best
interest a strong peaceful Middle East
is in America's best interest
a strong Muslim world that
counterbalances Iran is in America's
best interest so we need to find a way
to let people know that this is a more
complex issue than what they're hearing
and we're not afraid of the complexity
let's lean into the complexity and let's
solve it together because the more that
America can influence peace around the
world the more that Erica the more that
America is an influential power in the
world and when we don't step into our
influence we leave a vacuum that allows
our largest adversaries Russia China
Iran to step into that vacuum instead
and that's exactly what we're seeing in
the global world right now we're seeing
not only are those countries stepping
into the vacuum that we're leaving
behind but they're allying together so
much so that even Hollywood movies like
Leave the World Behind is literally
showing what would happen if
North Korea and Iran worked together to
cut off the United States that's why
there were elements of both languages in
the movie itself right spoiler alert but
my point is if even modern media if even
Hollywood is showing this division from
east to west that goes to show how much
it's real because art reflects
reality okay so one thing I think we
have to acknowledge if if we're going to
at least put all the pieces on the table
and I just want to reiterate I don't
have the huus to think I'm the man to
turn to to solve this problem trust me
um I would turn to you I thought that
was a really good solution man that was
a good solution I don't think we have a
real one yet uh because of something you
taught me which is that you really have
to get in the mind of your enemy and
every assumption I have I know is coming
from my own frame of reference which
could not be more Western could not be
more American um and they don't want the
same things I want so I'll ask the
arguably the hardest question of all how
much does the cultural mindset of um the
Palestinians
or uh the
Israelis is this a a cultural Collision
from just the way that they view how
things ought to be that you're just
never going to be able to deal with that
or is this um well Iran is throwing so
much money around they're just doing
their bidding like what what is the
point of like if I'm Iran and I want to
um
destabilize Israel and get the world to
turn on them what's the lever that I
pull to get the Palestinian people to do
what I want them to do is it a religious
lever that I pull is it something else
so in the in the radicalization process
one of the things that we're taught at
CIA is that there's a there's a ladder
of radicalization an actual process for
how you radicalize an extremist and
that's an extremist whether they're a
Christian extremist or an ethnic
extremist or a Muslim extremist there's
a ladder of extremism and the first step
is validating an
injustice it's the first step because
when people believe that there's a
perceived Injustice and nobody validates
that Injustice then they are conditioned
they are they are primed to believe that
there was no Injustice and they're just
angry about
nothing so the first step in a
radicalization process is to validate an
injustice it's independent of religion
right this was done to you it should
have never been done to you and then the
next step in the radicalization ladder
is to create the aggressor who's guilty
of the
Injustice this should have never
happened to you it happened to you
because of this villain it's a story and
now your un your Injustice has been
validated and there is a group that
executed that Injustice on you the next
step in the ladder is to say there are
others like you who have been equally
treated in this unjust way by the same
group so now the person who's walking up
this ladder is like I do have a reason
to be angry they are the enemy and
there's this group that I can join
against the same enemy and you can see
how this ladder just keeps on going
until it ends with you strap a bomb to
yourself and you run into their church
and you run into their synagogue and you
blow yourself up and now you win you can
see how the latter plays out
right the way that you defeat extremism
is by taking out the first step in the
ladder you have to take away the
Injustice
unfortunately what's happened since
October 7th has created
generational repercussions there will
not be a Palestinian for the next three
generations who does not have a visceral
memory a dead brother a dead sister a
dead child a dead mother a dead
grandmother a dead grandfather Aunts
Uncles there have been so many killed in
this attack in this counter attack since
October 7th that it's it's left a
generational
scar that is going to
be 50 years worth of work
for everybody who gets in on the action
to try to resolve this problem we will
have to face and accept that there was
an injustice that was carried out and
that we can resolve it so that instead
of taking people up a ladder of
radicalization we can take them through
a ladder of healing a ladder of of
resolution
right what happened here what is
continuing to happen every day is
fixable we can't fix what's happened
already but we can fix what we do moving
forward we can give people an option we
can give people Solutions give them
outcomes 60 Minutes can change a life if
you give them an outcome so what
outcomes can we reach that that changes
the whole trajectory of what's happening
in the Middle East we have to be willing
to ask ourselves that question and with
the rubber really meets the road where
it gets really uncomfortable for us is
that we have to be willing to accept
that mistakes were made policy mistakes
narrative mist mistakes military
mistakes and that we are going to pay
the reputational and financial penalty
of those mistakes that were made we just
we have to do that if we're going to
really invest in a solution to what's
happening in the Middle East
unfortunately it is just easier when
your neighbors are fighting to just stay
out of the fight but if we really want
to stand as the leader of the Free World
we have to find a way to create freedom
for both peoples in the Middle East we
have to be invested in both peoples in
the Middle East not to mention the fact
that the closer we get to the Muslim
world the more secure we will be against
Islamic extremism because we won't be
isolated we won't stand opposite Islam
and and Muslim Evolution and Muslim
development we will find a way to
partner with it and and and not be a
world divided by boundaries and faith
and religion but world that's connected
by a common belief in humanity and
connection we can do that it will be
expensive it will be timec consuming it
will be a lot of eating crow and Humble
Pie but if we can do it for 50
years that doesn't seem like a long time
consider the fact that Israel didn't
even exist before
1948 in the in the annals of time
they're less than 100 years old they're
still a young country we're still a
young country right if we can evolve and
change and come to our adolescence then
certainly they can evolve and change
before they even reach their
adolescence again maybe that's too IDE
ideological but um I think that it is
probably
too um it's too idealistic maybe it's
too
paana so but it it begs the next
question which is okay
um and using enemy is is not probably
ideal language which again is a step in
this whole process of thinking through
something well understanding how you
have to change your own frame of
reference which I think is going to be a
big part of this but um if I were
Consulting on this project uh I would be
really trying to understand okay what
what is the mindset of the people that
I'm dealing with what are the things
that I know I'm not going to be able to
alter so like the religious angle I'm
going to have to find a way for them to
see like a connection or to ignore it
I'm not going to be able to get them to
adopt each other's way of thinking okay
so um I still come back to we have to
have a goal I think the go the the goal
has to be um that the Palestinians feel
they are in control of their own destiny
I just really look that is a western
notion that that not everybody in the
world agrees with so I'm very open to if
that's my fundament flaw in my thinking
but my thinking is built upon that that
for them to really have hope in their
future and to believe that their
children's lives will be better that
they have to feel a sense that they own
their own destiny they control their own
lives they can build the nation the way
that they want to and uh so I need to
understand given that the you're not you
have to remove the idea of we're just
going to get rid of the Jewish people
you are inviting them to fight tooth and
nail uh and they're currently so much
better at that than you that it's just a
death nail uh so I would take that off
the table in terms of it's not going to
lead to the outcome I'm going for anyway
uh so if we take that off the table then
I need to understand why the two-state
solution continues to be rejected
because if it's for religious reasons
then we have to we have to either
confront that directly and create a new
narrative one thing that I think people
underestimate is the need for off-ramps
and this was something I heard people
very wisely talk about with Russia and
Ukraine people were very angry with
Putin for invading a Sovereign Nation
and rightly so but if you don't give him
an off-ramp yep where he can sa face and
look good to his people you are
guaranteeing an escalation correct and
so while it's gross and it's icky and
[__] hateful and nobody wants to do
it it's certainly going to save lives
again what's your goal and if your goal
is I'm perfectly happy for every single
Ukrainian to Die Trying to to um push
back Russia okay then uh if that's your
goal then you're making choices that
make sense with that if that isn't your
goal then putting on the table an
offramp for Putin um would be wise
because both zalinski and Putin need
off-ramps to be able to go to their
people and say see we got a victory
right and so if I were helping advise or
negotiate I'd just be thinking about
that like how do I help them each say
face even if I think one or both of them
are horrendous I'm still going to give
them
are off ramps here
sides face and feel like okay um we
quote unquote won this thing and that
there's an empowering narrative for both
of them so that that has to be found so
whether that is um I'm reading a book
right now called Silk
Roads really interesting
book a pretty and I don't know how
accurate is so full disclosure but uh a
really interesting take on history about
how um East and West have sort of bumped
into each other over and over throughout
time and that the author was painting
this really fascinating picture where uh
there were a time where there wasn't
seen to be a big gap between Muslims and
uh Jews and I found that very
interesting and they weren't really
bothered by the differences in each
other's Faith so anyway I would look
into that to see is there really
something there where we can paint a a
far more United Vision married to an
economic it because if we can make their
lives better quickly then suddenly that
becomes very interesting and so marrying
it to your idea of okay how do we uh get
real infrastructure built so that their
lives really are better whether that's
education better hospitals better roads
I I don't know there I have nothing but
ignorance to offer but there is a thing
you can do that builds a um a stable
entity where you can get food shelter
water education uh and Life starts
moving in the right direction so what
are those things how do you avoid
corruption all that of course would be
hyper complicated um and I don't know
enough about the Abraham Accords again
I'm I'm very much a headline reader
there but given how much enthusiasm was
going into that and its economic in
nature can you get that back on track
but you have to do something where they
you really are giving them a a super
tangible win yeah the the thing that's
missing I feel like in a lot of the
conversations is to understand
that what's happening in Israel is a
proxy conflict between Iran and the
United States and what does Iran want
Iran wants ultimately what Iran wants is
a Shia Crescent something they've been
after for a long time is it ideological
in nature is it power in nature it's
it's power and land mass it really is a
caliphate I don't know what a caliphate
is a
Islamic uh Homeland that's stretching is
beyond Iran right and and is Shia Islam
in nature not Sunni Islam which is the
predominant Islam throughout the the
Kian Arabic State speaking States so
that's really what Iran wants and they
they struggle to get that and the
largest counterbalance to Iran isn't the
United States it's Saudi Arabia so when
you actually hone in on the Middle East
the two big powers like counterbalancing
each other are Saudi Arabia and Iran the
United States is just an outside player
saudi's a lot bigger than Iran though by
GDP a lot bigger by GDP a lot bigger by
land mass however the Bread Basket of
the Middle East is Iran the Bread Basket
of that that's so significant it means
that UAE and Oman and Jordan and Saudi
Arabia all list Iran as an enemy but
they all get their agriculture from Iran
the Cucumbers the fresh fruit the
vegetables it's a carve out so that we
can continue they can continue to have
uh agricultural trade with Iran another
thing that people don't realize is that
there's carve outs all the time that's
that is the power of Economics That's
The Power of Economics because Iran then
could just choke them all off correct
but they want the money correct Iran
wants some some form of income and
revenue yeah and they've been sanctioned
in so many ways so it's just to your
point about needing an economic and a
religious solution
I don't fully disagree but I would
prioritize economics first because if
you can incentivize people economically
economics runs the world oh for sure if
to cooperate they will find a way for
their religions to also cooperate right
they will find a way to say hey you know
what we all come from the same Papa Bear
we all came from everybody all the
nations they come from us like let's get
along let's do that right that's
something that France can't say that's
something the United States can't say
United States definitely can't say that
we come from anybody we're the bastard
children of everybody we just flocked
here right so there's there's absolutely
a solution there
ideologically what isn't there is a
solution economically and it's not just
about economically incentivizing the
Palestinians it's also about
economically incentivizing the Israelis
it takes two sets of economic stimulus
two sets of economic benefits and even
better if they can be economic benefits
that are comingled right so the the more
success in Israel the more success in
Palestine the more success in Palestine
the more success in Israel right create
in a sense of Independence among them
unfortunately creating independent
Partners is something the United States
is very bad at we since World War II
have specialized in creating dependent
Partners that's why NATO doesn't really
like us very much anymore that's why
France and Spain and Germany are
actively opponents of the United States
in NATO because they realize that what
we've really done is made all of Europe
dependent on the United States for their
technology for their trade for their
financial uh soleny and now the same
thing is it's difficult for the United
States to adopt a different sort of
policy than essentially economic
bullying uh and that's something we're
going to have to learn how to do right
it's it's something that I
think a pre an old generation of
capitalists believed that you had to be
the biggest in order to be
safe what I think the new era of
capitalists is learning is that we can
be
Innovative successful financially uh
independent financially Soul like
solvent we can be a lot of things and
still be totally safe because it's only
when you're competing for the top space
that you're really at risk nobody really
cares about everybody else who's just
even people who are thriving people over
Overlook all the people who are thriving
they focus on the very poor and they
focus on the very rich so I mean running
a I I hope to one day run a $50 million
business and in the eyes of business
that's still small I think the actual
cut off for small business is $45
million a year think about that you can
run a $35 million business and still be
classified as a small business I'm not
trying to compete with hundred billion
dollar businesses or not trying to
compete up I want to make an impact I
want to build wealth I want to make a
difference in the world I want to leave
a legacy for my children much like many
entrepreneurs we want to make a splash
but we don't need to make the biggest
splash the United States wants I believe
that the United States is still the best
option of all the bad options we're the
best bad option for how the world should
lean through superpower
dominance until a better solution
presents itself
I'm going to continue investing in
American Primacy it's why my company is
an American company and I couldn't be
prder to pay American taxes right
because my business is helping to fund a
stronger America that makes me very
proud it makes me very happy but there's
plenty of Indians and singaporeans and
and ties who are also very proud that
their business is running is building
their
country proxy wars uh how serious is
this there is there are days where I
wake up and I feel like no for real for
real like we are a couple errant
missiles from this escalating and World
War III like kicks off in Earnest and
the way that I see that playing out is
if if Iran comes out of the shadows and
says you've gone too far like we have to
step in and do something and then
America has to step in to protect Israel
to make good on their promises and then
China uh starts watching that and goes
ah the US is drained it surpluses in
Ukraine and now in uh Israel now is the
time for us to move on Taiwan they move
on Taiwan and now all hell has broken
loose and you legitimately have a World
War and this is one where man I'm a lay
person that can draw a pretty believable
path to how we get there and I can only
imagine somebody that actually is uh
forget what you call it like red in or
whatever like they're they're getting
like the intelligent
be like yeah yeah that's that's one of
the 17 ways that this could escalate and
really pop off um am I falling into
conspiracy uh or are we really at a
tenuous moment we are really at a
tenuous moment that is that is a yes
hard yes we are at a tenuous moment
however what I would say is that what
you're falling into is not conspiracy
it's something we called
catastrophizing you're you're Paving the
road catastrophic step by catastrophic
step meaning that everybody turns to the
most destructive of all solutions before
taking a previous step right so uh for
example for someone for another country
to attack The Sovereign for another
state actor to attack the sovereignty of
the United States is something nobody
wants to do the deterrence that the
United States has through their military
through their economic power through
their reach that that is Inc that what
we call a deterrent is so powerful it
prevents people from taking that
catastrophic step the other thing you
have to account for is that not every
culture approaches conflict the way that
America approaches conflict we are a
Waring culture so we're like blow the
[__] out of them we're going to bomb
we're going to kill we're going to shoot
we're going to get boots on the ground
we need tanks we need rifles we need
everything right
sunsu does not operate that way the the
entire Chinese poit Bureau the whole
Chinese pla doesn't operate that way
they're not a boots on the ground kick
them in whatever else they are a long
slow death by a Thousand Cuts we are a
hacksaw chainsaw shoot them up cut them
up country right so you've also got Iran
in there you've got Russia in there
you've got Israel in there you've got
Saudi Arabia in there you've got France
Germany UK all these other big players
they're all in there with their own take
on how conflict should escalate and how
conflict should be carried out out so
when you catastrophize you take the
presumptive path that everybody leaps to
the most catastrophic decision whereas
you have to bake into that some level of
probability the highest probability is
that no country will attack the
sovereignty of the United States highest
probability right nobody will attack the
sovereignty of the United States so you
and me are safe inside American borders
that does not mean that Americans are
safe outside of American borders but
then you start getting into the realm of
extremism and targeted violence against
Americans because of ideological or
other purposes that becomes proxy right
so now when Americans are attacked in
kinasa uh Democratic Republic of Congo
simply because they're American and
they're attacked by congales who are
funded by you name the the country you
name Russia uh South North Korea like
whatever Iran now that becomes murky
murky is exactly what the world wants
when it comes to conflict with the
United States because if it's murky the
United States has a hard time justifying
any kind of response that goes state to
state because it's There's No Smoking
Gun right it's becomes just difficult
enough there's plausible deniability and
that's that's exactly what you're seeing
play out here
so again going back to the whole idea
you when you reference World War II
happening when most people reference
World War III happening what they're
actually talking about is a nuclear
nulear War similar to how World War II
ended Wars evolve like people evolve and
if anything if you've seen the evolution
of Technology you can imagine how much
more advanced World War II will be than
World War II all wars from civil to
World War II were all fought Vietnam and
Beyond were all fought over economics so
if there's a more economically viable
way to execute Warfare that is how
people will execute Warfare proxy wars
are a very economically viable way to
execute Wars economic Wars are a very
economically viable way to execute Wars
when the United States cut off Russian
bank accounts as part of their sanctions
against Russia and they cut off access
to Russian funds that were denominated
in euros and dollars that was an
economic Warfare move when China floods
the market with US Dollars and buys un
or runman B off the market to change
their valuation that is an that's an act
of economic Warfare that is conflict
that is so much more cheaper and viable
and creates less uh less stress and uh
public response than actually sending
your citizens to die at the end of a at
the end of a bullet or a rocket launch
right so we have to accept that the
probability is much higher that we will
continue to see increasing proxy
conflict increasing economic conflict
and solutions other than what we call
Interstate conflict or conflict between
two Sovereign Nation States it's very
surprising what Russia did in Ukraine
very surprising because inra Interstate
War like that has almost been like
eradicated the the last time that a
country invaded another sovereign
country was when the United States
invaded Afghanistan in
2003 right there's 20 something years
where no country had invaded another
country lots of Civil War but no
interstate so lots of intrastate war
Civil War but no Interstate War so it
was a a huge turn away from popular
military Doctrine but you know Putin was
playing certain odds and and I think
what we're all discovering now is what
he really cares about is eastern Ukraine
where you know the predominance of their
energy flow goes through and and that's
what he's got right now so I would say
that if you take the catastrophizing off
the table and you look at probabilities
we will continue to see more proxy wars
and more third world countries where the
United States has to fund one side and
China or Russia or or Iran have to fund
the opposite side and they'll keep vying
for influence because the economically
speaking the country with the most
markets to expand into will be the
future economic Powerhouse of the world
and economic power is what becomes the
investment for military power and that's
why the United States is dominant we've
had the economic power to invest in a
modern large military only country who's
competing with us is China and the only
reason they even have a chance to
compete with us is because for 20 years
we were head down focusing on the global
war on terror China didn't participate
in the global war on terror they spent
20 years with their heads up stealing
secrets and building infrastructure so
that when we finally looked up we
realized oh [__] like they're growing
fast and we got to change something Elon
mus says over the last I think 20 years
that the architecture in China has
become far more impressive than what's
happening in the
US what do you think the US would look
like had we taken all that foreign aid
that we've been sending to Wars and not
just foreign aid but to fight the wars
but also to proxy war um would it look
dramatically different yeah I think the
United States would look very very
different I think we would see I'm not
saying that I think it would look
necessarily better but I am saying it
would look very different keep in mind
that a lot of the investment that went
into Chinese infrastructure excuse me
was investment into uh State
surveillance
systems tracking populations um tracking
State IDs making sure people stayed in
their Lane and were only given the
opportunities that the state just
thought they deserved I don't think that
that's the direction we as Americans
would want to go I hope not but if we
were to have taken the hundreds of
billions that we spent in our Wars
abroad and put them into National
Security and other uh devices here in
the US for all we know that that could
have been one of the options that we
pursued was a large scale Statewide
security system that uh that on the
piggyback of that is a state
surveillance system very similar to what
you see actually in UAE and Saudi
Arabia that's really interesting when
you first said that it would look
different but you're not sure it would
look better I was like where is he going
with this that is very interesting and
yes right now people seem to be way more
interested in safety than they do
Freedom which it's funny cuz as a kid I
mean we have a state New Hampshire if
I'm not mistaken Live Free or Die is the
state motto and people now are like what
do you mean like of course safety is
more important than Freedom like it it's
it's flipped so hard from what it was
like when I was a kid when I was a kid
man it was like it was all about that
like Give Me Freedom or give me death
like I remember uh I think that's the
line that uh oh no uh in Braveheart when
you said you can take my life but you
can't take our freedom or something like
that um man it's different VI
did I uh and correct tell me if if I'm
repeating myself but did I walk you
through the civilization pyramid the
last time I was here o I've heard you in
so many different places I can't tell
you if it was here or not but please
give us a refresher so I feel like
what's happening is we're seeing the
civilization pyramid actually play out
and and the civilization pyramid is a
pyramid that talks about exactly what
you're what you're describing the
exchange of freedom and security the
bottom of the pyramid is all of our
individualism right you hunt and gather
for you I hunt and gather for me you
live in your cave I live in my cave and
I don't I don't have any say in what you
do you don't have any say on what I do
and if we need to fight then let's fight
to the death individualism at the bottom
end of that pyramid where we all started
where some countries still very much are
right moving up the pyramid the next
tier is tribalism which is like hey our
caves are next to each other you're
really good at hunting and gather at
hunting I'm really good at Gathering
let's team up and now we'll capture
efficiencies because if you're ever sick
I can make sure I collect enough food
for both of us and if I'm ever sick you
can make sure there's enough food for
both of us so now as a tribe we're safer
and to hell with the other tribes if
they come across the river if they come
if they start hunting our buffalo we'll
kill them so it's a step above
individualism it gives us some
efficiency because we have scalability
it gives us some security because we
have each other and we're United under
the banner of a tribe
the next and final peer uh uh level of
the pyramid is the state and as you move
up from individualism to the state you
start to give up your independent
freedoms but in exchange the state is
able to push down scalable efficiencies
and solutions so now there's a standing
military that keeps you safe now there's
there's Public Utilities that bring you
water now there's hospitals that bring
you medicine now there's insurance now
there'ss businesses now there's bakeries
now there's all this stuff that the
state helps to facilitate so that you
don't have to depend on your tribe in
fact if you want to live in California
or in Austin Texas or in Florida or in
New York you can pick your tribe you can
pick where you want to go because you're
all part of the state if you take the
state off the top of the pyramid and you
move the rest of the pyramid aside you
have another pyramid and that's
different levels of the state right so
at the bottom tier of the state you
basically have your your uh organized
State that's very the government's very
small and it gives people maximum
freedom and you know it's your it's your
uh uh political parties that don't want
to interfere or interfere with anybody
else's political party and then as you
move up you have what we consider to be
like uh conservative State Management
which is you know we have enough
government but not too much government
it creates guidelines but not heavily
regulate not heavily regulated we focus
on maximizing efficiency we minimize uh
policing our people right and then you
have the highest level of the state
which is very much your kind of
socialist or authoritarian state where
everything is regulated everything is
heavily managed everything is heavily
policed so when you put this smaller
pyramid back on top of the original
pyramid you have six levels of
civilization basically right the theme
with all of it is that as you climb the
pyramid you are giving up freedoms in
exchange for efficiencies the beautiful
thing about the United United States is
that we are a country where we slow down
our political processes because we have
two parties that are always fighting and
vying right so that forces us to slow
down which usually results in a
more popular more wellth thought out
solution even though we haven't quite
seen it play out that way recently but
we slow down the velocity so we make
better stronger decisions that are more
time time tested but we also give
individuals the right to move up and
down the pyramid as they choose so if
you want to be a prepper in Kentucky
that lives off the grid you go right
down the pyramid and there you go you
can if you want to be a hyper you know
socialist you know publicly declared
communist that lives in whatever New
York you can and both people are
protected by the laws of the land but
they live at different parts of the
pyramid so to your point I feel like we
are absolutely at this precipice in
world events where we have to kind of
decide what we want to do as individuals
but the larger question is as
individuals we all also have a say in
what we do as a nation and that is going
to be the larger impact on what we leave
behind yeah and I'm
super I'm interested to be sure I am a
little worried about what's going to
happen in 2024 I won't lie um if it ends
up being a trump Biden runoff what do
you think happens especially if Trump
wins I think that if you're not
preparing for that eventuality it would
be wise to prepare for that eventuality
highest the highest two
probabilities are that either Trump wins
the presidency or Biden wins the
presidency so just speaking practically
again mentally as a business owner as a
father as a husband I'm preparing
for one of these two things there's a
90% chance that one of these two things
is going to happen so let me be ready
for that and then the last 10% I'll let
surprise me right but I mean who knows
it's it's difficult it's also important
to understand that we all focus on the
president the
president what powers the president has
are granted to them by the Legislative
Branch we've gone through about a
30-year period where our legislative
branch has been giving more power to the
executive branch specifically because
the legislative branch is trying to
cover their own ass they want to be
lifetime legislators they don't want to
be responsible for the people and they
don't want to be accountable to the
people so instead they want to be able
to say you voted me into office and the
president doesn't let me do my job
because I gave him all of my authority
so part of what we need to do is see the
legislative branch take back the power
from the president which they can do
with a vote the president doesn't need
to give them power back they can take
power back but they do need to give the
president power he can't take power from
the legislative branch so in both cases
whether it's Biden or whether it's Trump
the real impact there is just how the
world sees the United States and then
the fact that both presidents presidents
have the right to build their cabinet
however they choose to build their
cabinet so they both are going to bring
in their cronies they're both going to
bring in their yes people they're both
going to bring in people who are who are
uh biased towards their own political
Futures they're not nobody really at the
top is thinking about what's in the best
interest of the American people because
we've created this
self-licking ice cream cone where where
politics is about rewarding the
politician with politics instead of
there's there's no incentive to serve
the American people especially not when
the American people are split like we're
split right now so it's it's tough man
it's tough and I I will say that what my
wife and I keep an eye on is
less it's less about whether or not
Donald Trump becomes president and it's
more about how will
individuals
exercise their legal Powers how will
individuals exercise their civic
responsibilities when the outcome is
announced will that's a fancy way of
saying something yeah will they will
they Revolt there we go or will they go
to the [__] table and vote every two
years on the lowest levels of government
so that you can actually affect the
change in the government I it's it's
don't I it breaks my heart when I see
Americans [__] complain and pick it let
alone when I see them shoot and raid and
invade right all of that stuff is
something that we should be passed what
what we should be doing now is
exercising our Civic rights our Civic
duties our Civic Powers because we have
the power to affect everything up the
chain if we just exercise it if we're
willing to let things slow down and if
we're willing to cut out some of the
volume
and actually do things the way that has
always made America great we've always
been stronger because we have a
bureaucratic process that allows us to
slow things down allows us all the time
in the space to learn and ingest and
accept and internalize what we believe
to be true when we move at lightning
speed we can be duped we can be confused
we can be tricked let ourselves slow
down embrace the fact that we slow down
if we didn't slow down we'd be [__]
an authoritarian rule where literally
things change at the drop of one
person's Public Announcement we don't
want that we don't want that we want
something different yeah I mean I'm 100%
on board with that so as you look at
this with your analyst eyes um what do
you think will be the reaction to let's
say a trump getting elected because my
concern is uh when watching the Sam
Harris
Thing Happened on the internet I don't
know how closely you paid attention to
that but basically the entire internet
turned on what I think is one of the
smartest most thoughtful people I think
he's wrong but to your point about you
want to triangulate anyway you're not
just going to listen to one person Sam
is right about so many things um but he
I I believe I understand Sam maybe
better than a lot of people in that the
thing that Sam believes is that Donald
Trump is an existential threat
and when someone becomes an existential
threat meaning it could wipe out
Humanity I want to be very clear about
what an existential threat is uh that
it's a whole new set of rules baby and
you do whatever you have to do
and that if Sam who is incredibly smart
and extremely thoughtful and I think a
hyperoral person um but I also think
he's wrong about this so my thing is
okay I think the real problem we have is
we don't agree on what constitutes an
existential threat I actually don't know
that we disagree about what to do in the
face of a true existential threat but
like when I look at Trump getting
elected I'm like please Jesus no but at
the same time I don't see it as an
existential threat so and I look at like
we we had four years with them it what
the world didn't end everybody like but
at the same time other people look at
him like we we dodged a nuclear weapon
like what are you talking like it could
be the end of humanity if he gets
elected again that freaks me out the
fact that people think hey him getting
elected could end the world now if this
were like Fringe crazies I'd be like
whatever yeah this is coming from some
of the smartest people I know that are
there're very good at thinking through
problems so of course Part of Me Goes is
he an existential threat like I don't
think I'm the Arbiter right so I'm
captain distrust yourself but as so the
only thing I'm saying is when I analyze
the situation there are enough people
that believe that he is an actual
existential threat that if he gets
elected I think you have a problem I
don't think uh look I'm a big believer
that America's freakishly resilient I
don't think it
collapses but do I think that at a
minimum we take another step towards the
Civil War yes I really do that that one
really freaks me out like I I can buy
into the proxy wars that World War III
is going to be fought very
surreptitiously there won't be as much
hot to the war okay don't love it still
very high stakes still makes me very
tense but that's a lot better than say a
World War II um but dude in the summer
of 2020 I sat on my balcony and watched
La
burn and that wasn't even around
existential threats right so yeah I
don't know and I don't know what's worse
and again I'll ask you with your your
CIA analyst haton what's worse Trump
getting elected or Trump not getting
elected so I'll start by saying that I
disagree with all the smart people that
you're referencing right now and I would
gladly who think he's an existential
threat yes I would gladly sit in front
of anybody who believes that Trump is an
existential threat
and have a healthy debate on any topic
they want to talk about because I have
actually seen existential threats and
Trump is not that can you paint an
existential threat picture an
existential
threat is is imminent it means that it
is the last step before the holistic
destruction the existence destroying
from
existence the
the Target that it is threatening right
so let's consider a battleship right a
Hypersonic cruise missile will destroy a
battleship right it is not an
existential threat to the battleship
even though it will destroy the
battleship it is not an existential
threat to the battleship because if even
one soldier
survives the memory of that battleship
in current memory still exists not to
mention all of the documentation about
the battleship existing and then they
rebuild a new one they give it the same
moniker and it's right back in service
again right it is a perilous threat it
is not an existential threat truly
existential threats are things that will
wipe you off the face of the Earth right
Iran wants to wipe Israel off the face
of the earth that is an existential
threat and when they say that when they
announced that they were talking about
Israel the state and Jews they want to
destroy them Nazi Germany posed an
existential threat to the Jewish faith
literally a systematic commitment to
destroying an entire generation like the
entire existence of it forever taking it
off the world the world stage forever
that is an existential threat what
happens is that we have become spoiled
in our
terminology catastrophizing has become
so common that now to get people
emotional to get people to move on their
on their beliefs you have to ramp
everything up to get past the volume and
the velocity of data you have to say the
next most extreme thing when you say the
most extreme thing long enough if you
call yourself stupid enough times guess
what you start to
believe you start to believe you're
stupid right so when you tell people
enough times it's an existential threat
it's an existential threat it's an
existential threat you start to actually
believe wow maybe it really is an
existential threat without stopping to
think in one presidency no president
Trump or anybody no president can
disband two of the three branches the
only thing the president can really do
is write an executive order about the
Executive Branch if our Congress exists
We Exist if our judicial branch exists
we exist right and the other two
branches are there to keep the executive
branch in power so one four-year
presidency one eight-year presidency two
eight-year presidencies with President
Trump is not with a future president
Trump is not going to be the end of
America could it do significant damage
absolutely but it's not an existential
threat it just isn't it doesn't threaten
to end the United States it threatens to
make life difficult but lots of things
threaten to make life difficult we can't
guarantee that Trump comes into office
and
somehow everything changes for the
better who knows we don't we don't
actually know there's there's a term
that we use in in uh intelligence
operations called The Cone of
uncertainty and if you imagine like a
funnel or a cone or you know a pennant
whatever
it's a it's a certain shape the timeline
of known reality goes right up to the
beginning of the cone and then where you
see the actual cone that becomes an area
of predictable confidence that you can
guess within but where that cone ends
everything past the cone is totally
unpredictable you have no confidence
about what will happen one way or the
other so unless there is an existential
threat the threatening the existence and
future existence something within that
cone then you can't really take it as a
as a level of confidence one way or the
other so my recommendation to those
people catastrophizing and everybody
who's feeling that pressure that anxiety
have a plan for When Donald Trump is
announced as the winner of the
presidency have a plan for it hope and
vote against it all you want but don't
let it happen without a plan for what to
do next we have a plan for what to do
next our plan takes us out of the United
States
if Donald Trump becomes the president
and our country takes a turn for the
worst we're leaving the United States we
already have the plan if if Joseph Biden
wins the presidency and the United
States takes a turn for the worst we're
leaving the United States that's our
plan doesn't mean that we're not proud
to be Americans it just means that where
we are in our lives with our children
with our business with what we're trying
to do in our personal mission it is not
to fix the United States right now we'll
let other people who are passionate
about that fix the United States right
now we're going to go grow our family
and take care of our family grow our
business grow our impact pay our taxes
and make sure the United States has the
resources that needs to get through its
adolescence but other people are very
dedicated to being part of the solution
right now and I applaud those people and
I want to give them the resources they
need to be that level of impact it's
interesting when you said earlier that
um you were you really believed in the
supremacy of the US I knew that you plan
to
leave I thought it was a longer timeline
than that um that's very interesting so
that tells me that you think that uh
well let me not put words in your mouth
are you saying that if one of those two
gets elected that there is a
distressingly high probability of a bad
turn yes I would agree with that
statement completely okay wa regardless
of which two we're picking between two
bad
options and that's just where we are
right now unfortunately I think there
are good options on the table who one of
the options that I would actually
personally love to see take the
presidency is Nikki Haley I don't even
know who that is I hear her and that's
why she's not going to win so I hear her
name all the time I I'm gonna have to
watch something I don't know what she
looks like never heard her voice I think
of all the things that the country could
really benefit from right now it's a
female levelheaded Centrist and even
though she runs on the Republican ticket
she is very much a her her narrative is
a very Centrist narrative and I really
like the idea of our country kind of
coming out of this 8-year
Disaster by showing that one of the
things that makes us so powerful is our
diversity and I think we are at a time
now where a strong female leader would
be welcomed here unfortunately I think
that that Hillary Clinton in many of the
years that she was running wasn't the
right fit at the right time I think
Nikki Haley might be different than that
but that doesn't mean she's got any
traction that doesn't mean it's going to
happen but it is one of those 10%
outcomes where all of a sudden I see
like sunlight instead of more rain and
and snow did she run last cycle no it's
the first time she's run and
unfortunately she's showing a lot of the
a lot of the uh um
neopit making classic mistakes yeah
arguing over petty stuff and debates and
blah blah blah blah blah and not really
showing that she's above all that and to
be president you got to be above all
that frivolity either you've got to do
the Obama approach and just not address
it or you've got to do the Trump
approach and address it jovially and
make light of it jovially I love that
yeah I got the best words I've got the
best words I'm the best no one's ever
had words this good I cannot do an
impression to save my life but uh yeah
the way he talks is hilarious yeah yeah
uh okay what do you think of vivec
ramaswami I wanted to like Vic a lot but
you don't I wanted to like him a lot I
still think that he's got he's he's made
so many positive Impressions on me but
at the same time he just he's not been
consistent in terms of the positive
Impressions right picking fights with
Nikki Haley over silly things like Tik
Tock and personal attacks on her family
come on man You' got to act presidential
I loved when he came out of the gates
he's prepared he's a minority he's young
so many things there that that you could
that anybody could rally behind in love
but then there's these behavioral
challenges where you're like dude the
last thing I want to do is have you be
negotiating with the prince of Saudi
Arabia and you're gonna jab him on one
of his wives like no that's not a good
idea for us no thank you right again
neoy beginner kind of error that he's
going to try to fix up but that's just
that's where we are right now and again
going back to the original question
there's a there is a very solid chance
that a trump or a Biden presidency is
going
to change its course even 15 or 30
degrees change its course focus on
American needs focus on American economy
maybe even apologize for bad calls in
the past who knows good luck with that
one but they can they can change the
course and make significant benefits but
if they stay their
course then it's just more pain for all
of us and we can't we we can't stand by
idly and let that happen this this the
pyramid the civilization pyramid is not
worth just sitting by and being silent
we have a chance to impact our state we
should yeah no doubt I think a lot of
people are going to try to have impact
during this election cycle I want to
know we talked about this a little bit
earlier but how much do you think
manipulative tactics will be used on
social media to sway I'm not even
worried about necessarily foreign
influence just like the Twitter files in
fact have a a quote that I want to read
um about the time we're living in now
it's from Eric Weinstein um shout out to
Eric who I love dearly I think he's an
incredible human uh his quote is we now
know post Elon musk's $44 billion
Adventure at Twitter that there are
these coordinating groups coordinating
social media with the intelligence
Community or with the Department of
Homeland Security or the state
department we now know that we're living
in an orchestrated curated choreographed
world World we've always known that we
just haven't admitted it and let's keep
this in mind too as much as people want
to say that that's a bad
thing that social media and which again
social media is not media social media
what I mean by that is social media is
not journalism social media is
entertainment that's socially generated
it's essentially just like a jukebox
right it's it's a
business we of course want
the intelligence Community the National
Security infrastructure of the United
States hip and hiip with American
businesses because that's how we will
most like that's our vulner our most
vulnerable place to foreign threats is
through our economics so when you take
away the fact that Facebook and Twitter
are massive social voices because
everybody uses them and you just
consider the fact that they're a
business it makes perfect sense that you
would want a business hip and hip with
the national security sector so that
they can counter any foreign efforts to
impact American economics we don't think
of it that way we think of it like no
free speech and and freedom of choice
and they shouldn't have a say in what
gets published and what doesn't get
published at the same time when Russia
uses Facebook to create influence
campaigns who do we blame we blame
Facebook and we blame the intelligence
infrastructure for not protecting us
again we want to Americans are a Waring
culture and we want to believe that we
are entitled to everyone else's [__]
secrets but nobody's entitled to our
secrets and it's a it's a dichotomy that
we can't seem to fuse together right
either there are no secrets or there are
secrets you don't get you don't get to
choose which secrets you get and which
secrets you don't uh that's if anybody
gets to make that choice it really
should be a organization of insti
Ed legislative judicial and executive
powers because we voted those powers to
be in control of our secrets if you
don't like that change your vote right
so uh for sure we will be influenced by
these these sectors into our social life
absolutely we already are we will
continue to be and it will continue
forever we it's not different from what
we've seen in the past what were hate
ads on TV what are Flyers that come in
the mail what is people knocking on your
door and getting you to sign petitions
all those are all forms of influence and
an effort to sway public opinion and an
effort to get top of mind for some
politician it's always been there it
just changed media format it just makes
us pissy that it happens by Foreign
actors and domestic actors on social
media because we forget the fact that
social media is not [__] news it's
not journalism it's not vetted it's not
reviewed there's no professional
criteria it is entertainment that's what
it was always meant to be it was always
meant to be dancing babies and kitten
videos and stunts on motorcycles that's
what it was meant to be it's just turned
into the fact that people don't do
enough interesting [__] that now what
they do instead is they forward articles
that they only read the headline and it
makes them emotional so they forward
more and more of them and people like it
and thumbs up it comment on it without
actually reading the article they just
read the headline you took time out of
this interview to speak to the people
before they made comments because you
care about making sure that people
understand what we're talking about not
just read a headline kneejerk reaction
create
virality that's not what we're going for
but that is what ends up happening on
social media that going back to our
conversation about cover influence
that's exactly what cover influence
wants it wants to find two existing
causes that all they need is a little
bit of extra gasoline and they light up
social media is the perfect place light
up the left light up the right light up
the left light up the right and all of a
sudden people don't know what's true and
what's false and they're fighting
against each other I don't believe that
we'll turn into Civil War fighting I
think it takes a lot more before we
start pulling guns on each other but it
does cause enough chaos and delay and it
hampers our progress enough that we will
lose influence on the global stage
not ideal uh what do you think is going
to happen with AI because all of that
feels like uh it it gets supercharged to
a level that that is unimaginable when
you have ai you talk about volume you
can now put out you could put out
150,000 Trump Clips a day that aren't
him but look and sound like him and even
if they're meant as parody people will
start believing them I can't tell you
the number of times I made the mistake
of Actually I don't even think I follow
it but um I probably liked something at
one point the Elon Musk parody account
and I will routinely forget to check
whether it's him or the parody account
and even though it's right there I'm
just like oh [__] like I can't believe
he just said that's C oh wait it's the
parody account and so I think how often
did I not notice that that was the
parody account and so when you've got
you know take someone like my mom God
bless her cotton socks she won't notice
that something because I can tell when
something is AI generated it's off just
enough my mom won't I'm optimistic about
a I'll be one of the few people that say
it because I think that our greatest
breakthroughs are still ahead of us
because of AI I think that all of the
fatalistic thinking all the
catastrophizing about AI is from our
analytical overlay and what we've been
conditioned to believe from videos and
books and sci-fi right sentient AI that
determines that that human beings are
the worst thing for human beings so they
eradicate us do I believe that AI will
be used for influence for politic
for local government do I think it'll be
abused absolutely it'll be abused just
like TV was abused just like radio was
abused just like newspaper articles were
abused I mean just like the internet's
abused for sure it'll go in that way and
then it'll be regulated back or the
market will prove that it's not
profitable to create that much junk that
among amidst all the junk that you're
creating your real value can't shine
through so people will stop creating
junk and they'll start creating more
meaningful stuff so if AI just imagine
if AI could be used to expand the reach
of nonprofits trying to solve cancer so
that instead of their minimal media team
creating five posts a week they could
create 150 posts a week and that 150
posts turn into a 200% increase in
funding for cancer research yeah I'm
super pro AI like I am U stamped on on
the accelerator I love it the most yep
uh but I am also aware of just based on
the things we've been able to create in
house not not in the vein that I'm
talking about but you see how real it is
and how quickly you can confuse people
um that it's just going back to the
volume velocity problem it will be used
to have a clip of Biden falling down
stumbling and sounding ridiculous it
will be used to have Trump spout crazy
lies and outrageous [__] and then what I
think will happen is people are going to
have to end up using the blockchain as
way to Watermark these so that you can
prove which ones are legit not legit and
so the old thing um you know I'm Tom
Bilu and I approve this message kind of
thing at the end will be replaced with
that's really just their um mark on the
um on the blockchain and so people in
embedded in Twitter now X whatever it
will just automatically say yes this is
an official message no it's not whatever
um I think it will end up having to be
something like that but I think this is
the year where it becomes a big enough
problem that then those Solutions have
to be put in place bad timing for that
to happen because now you can really
sway public perception and so this gets
one of the reasons I want to have you
back on not only do I just absolutely I
haven't even looked at the clock and I
know we're [__] deep in uh just
beyond fun um but when I think about
having a perspective on some of these
just like grueling difficult things
you've got such an interesting take on
the different ways that these could go
and probabilities and all that um but
yeah I think 2024 has a probability of
um being squirly and that people need to
um not allow themselves this this is me
talking to my past self for anybody
wondering why I changed the show I
started changing my show about four
years ago now uh and it was because
realized I had been so heads down on an
entrepreneurial Journey that I didn't
even understand the World At Large I
only UND understood it in as much as I
needed to build a business and then when
Co hit just like whoa this is not the
world I thought I was living in and so
all of a sudden I was like okay my
prediction engine is completely broken
and that means I've connected dots in an
erroneous way I now need to completely
remap the territory um and that sent me
down a journey of like oh I need to
understand how the world Works what is
the essence of the game who are the
players what are the pieces that are on
the chessboard so that I can
understand this and so as I look at
2024 make predictions they will mostly
be wrong but they'll be directionally
useful at a minimum and so this is one
of those things that I really think
people need to um load up into their
working memory about what do they need
to be aware of how can AI be used as a
tool in your business as a tool in your
life how can it be used to manipulate
you um how do you encounter a problem
you've never seen before and think well
through it so that you're not just
primed by the person you're sitting
across and now they've trapped you in an
answer and you're stuck and you're like
wait how did I end I don't even believe
that what what just happened right but
you've said this a lot and I really
agree with this that um if you
understand the tools and tactics you're
way less likely to be used by them Y and
so you can begin to escape that stuff so
speaking of there's one thing that um by
way of stories I think has really
captured people's imagination and
becomes a bit of a litmus test of what
the hell is going on on and that's
Epstein so this is somebody I'm very
curious to get your take as a a former
spy Eric Weinstein he never comes out
and says the exact words but he's
basically saying that the his the
literal words he uses are this guy is a
construct of someone else someone else
created this guy that we call Jeffrey
Epstein and so my question becomes then
the internet runs with that I don't know
what Eric thinks beyond that exact
statement but the internet certainly
runs with all right this guy's a CIA CIA
operative designed to get Intelligence
on people like Bill Clinton which is why
you have a painting of Bill Clinton
wearing a dress in the man's foyer which
is weird and I'll admit I try not to
jump to conclusions but that's a bad
look man uh and so is he a real guy is
he a CIA plant like what what what do
you see what does the data say uh my I
don't have enough data to say what the
data says what I do have is enough
information to pull on assessments that
I think have a reasonable
probability CIA does not operate the way
most people think that CIA operates and
CIA would never have the legal jur
jurisdiction or the incentive to spy on
an American president but do they have
the legal jurisdiction to sell drugs
which they do we know that you know I
mean do you know who the ultimate power
is over CIA which branch government the
executive branch so so if he says it's
cool to sell drugs then it's cool s
drugs yo dude we do things that are
classified for a reason wow and we do it
all in the best interest of protecting
Americans and I mean I am the kind of
person that's practical to a fault right
so if you tell me that I can either sell
cocaine to impoverished Latin American
countries or watch a 100 Americans die
I'm a cocaine dealer wow I'm just just
the way I work dude like just like you
you are honest I appreciate that the the
lives here are more valuable to me than
the lives here that's just I know that
makes me sound however that makes me
sound but that's just the way I was
that's that's the way I'm wired that's
my analytical overlay yeah so I have
zero reason to believe and zero evidence
to believe zero experience to believe
that Epstein is not a real person or was
some kind of CIA manufactured plant or
was a CIA asset or a CIA resource zero
reason to believe any of those things
about foreign however here we go however
I have lots of reasons and lots of
experience to make me believe that he
was a intelligence resource for someone
else he may have been a resource for FBI
because that's a whole different
Authority that's granted on
investigating criminal activity inside
the United States and they work with
Shady people they work with criminals
they work with sources of all kinds so
he may have had a relationship with FBI
I can't speak to that but definitely not
CIA however if I was an intelligence
officer in any of the leading
intelligence Services the French the
Israelis the Russians the Chinese the uh
Iranians if I was an intelligence Source
in for Germany if I was an intelligence
officer in any country that was
interested in what's happening in the
United States I would 100% have devoted
time and energy into tracking and trying
to recruit Epstein into my asset of
reporting sources because he had
access such privileged access and he was
so malleable in terms of what he needed
and what he wanted so that he could be
controlled those two things are exactly
what you're looking for in the dream
boat asset you want someone who can be
controlled by simple levers and someone
who has incredible access those two
things together make a Dreamboat case
and and I mean even for an
unsophisticated service right like your
unsophisticated services being Ecuador
or Panama or you know uh Romania those
are basic Services basic intelligence
Services you're really refined really
talented services like Cuba like uh MSS
and China like like the svr and Russia
those Services could absolutely make
someone like that sing and keep him well
fed and well versed in the things that
they that he needed and and get
incredible access back from him and then
when the natural course of American
judicial process takes place they can
distance themselves from him as much as
they need to right because he's
definitely not going to come out and be
like actually guys don't convict me
because I'm a really I'm reporting to
the Russians no he's never going to say
it so it's it's all the Hallmarks of a
very good intelligence
carried out by a foreign country doesn't
mean it is it just has all those
Hallmarks but a misinformed American
public who is UN un uh un irrationally
focused on CIA
conspiracies they see something that
does look and feel like an intelligence
operation but they attribute it to CIA
because their analy analytical overlay
from movies and TV instead of
attributing it to a truly adversarial
service that could execute an operation
like that what are the Hallmarks that
you see that really make you go uh can't
guarantee it but damn the the
access the fact that he was
so close to so many people on both sides
of the political debate right
conservatives and liberals and he
participated in extremely compromising
behaviors with both
sides that doesn't happen unless either
you
are
so uh disconnected from the American
experience that you really do see
everybody as just a tool or you've been
directed to build those relationships
and incentivized to build those
relationships and rewarded for building
those relationships because it takes a
lot of effort it takes effort to find
Common Ground between very far- leaning
people and then it takes effort to build
your life around being available to them
when they're available and then
orchestrating these compromising
activities that that takes so much time
and effort it's just not something that
normal people participate in even the
very wealthy come to a point where
they're like I could spend an hour with
this guy or I could spend an hour doing
this other thing that's even more
productive and they will rationalize
their way away against socializing and
into business or something other more
productive Venture right so the access
is the big thing and then the second
biggest thing is the incredible amount
of compromising behavior that he
participated in like even your your
kinkiest
craziest people who who don't follow any
kind of moral or ethical Compass right
even those folks have a hard time
functioning at that level and also
participating in that much compromising
activity that's documented right like
like often times to get to a place where
you're that morally and ethically
flexible you're not functional in other
ways he was somehow both so he could
have just been a very unique human being
I'm not going to say he wasn't but
probability wise he was
probably helped or directed in that way
not necessarily magically gifted but
there's still a chance now it's
interesting that's one of the things
Eric speaks to is that when he so Eric
was heavily involved in finance and
trading and he met him and he was like
there's no way that guy knew the first
thing about trading he was like there's
no way like you talk to him for 30
seconds and you're like what is
happening how this guy doesn't know
anything about what he's talking about
he's like he basically word salads his
way through stuff he uh Likens him to uh
if you've ever seen that Meme with Steve
Bushi who walks in hello fellow kids and
he's you know whatever 46 years old with
a skateboard over his back uh he said it
was like that with um trading which I
found hilarious that's a so that what
you're explaining to me now makes a
third Hallmark CU a third Hallmark of an
intelligence asset that's that's aided
in their intelligence uh success is that
they don't know what they're talking
about they end up in positions where
they Thrive and survive just off of
their con game their confidence So
eventually people just rationalize that
this person doesn't know what the hell
they're talking about but I don't really
care because they're a good time so
let's have a good time and let's not
have any meaningful
conversation perfect opportunity because
guess what that intelligence asset has
to do all they have to do is listen to
the intelligent conversations between
two people and provide that intelligence
to someone else or get them to
participate in compromising behavior
that they can use for either blackmail
or some sort of documentation for the
potential future or you know grab a
phone or grab a laptop or you know let
somebody into the part who's a trained
intelligence operative to meet the other
cases like there's so many ways an
intelligence officer can use an access
agent and or a foreign reporting agent
who has the kind of access and control
levers that Epstein had how often is sex
used to get people in compromising
positions in the United States often we
are a sexually repressed culture you you
have to consider that have I mean you've
traveled the world yeah but I mean damn
I don't it's not like I see people dry
humping on the couch in Europe it's like
but you do see nude ads in Europe I
guess a little bit yeah I mean bro I got
some sites if you want to see porn in
the US like you can find porn everywhere
you you can't find it everywhere that's
what's so interesting you can find it
but you can't find it everywhere right
just think about social media you can't
post Nudes on social media at least not
easily and at least not for very long I
don't know if x you can X is a whole
different world right now right but that
just goes to show like we believe in
monogamy we believe in in traditional
marriage we struggle to accept gay
marriage we struggle to accept
non-traditional relationships like we
have a long fat history of of
conservative sexual values maybe that's
changing but it's still very much
something that we struggle with right
now whereas in Latin America in Europe
in
Asia prostitution is legal
uh sexual escorts is legal three-way
relationships are common like old and
young relationships like sugar daddies
and sugar mamas all very common if not
if not culturally preferable where here
we don't have any of that so that the
end result of that is that we have such
a uh such a confined sexual culture that
when people have strong Sexual Energy
that they can't exerc excise when
they're given an opportunity to exercise
that Vice they take it and they jump at
it which is part of the reason that we
have the the issues that we have with
porn addiction here and the issues that
we have with adultery here and the
issues that we have with human
trafficking in the United States right
because people are looking for a way to
exercise this Vice that everywhere else
in the world is
acceptable that's interesting yeah I
have not thought of us as sexually
repressed but I hear what you're saying
compared to the Middle East though oh
yeah but you're talking about Sharia law
and most of the Middle East still that
gets pretty hardcore uh you have said
speaking of sex that spies have the best
sex tell me
more uh a big part of a big part of
being a spy is learning to accept your
vices right and there are predominantly
in our in our lexicon there are really
three vices there's drugs and alcohol
that's Vice number one which is
essentially a dampening of of anxiety
and a dampening of stress and whatever
else that's that's the first vice the
second Vice is greed or fame right
wanting something material to enhance
yourself and then the third vice is sex
and really sex is a vice that's
connected to intimacy and individual
connection right we just we categorize
them as as sex so
these are three human vices that are
international that we all learn about
all people so that when we come to break
down what people how people tick you
also want to break down what their what
Vice they lean towards and sometimes
their Vice changes as you as you age but
usually your Vice is pretty consistent
for your entire life and everybody
listening right now is immediately
saying that's my vice that's my vice
that's my vice that's my
vice at
CIA Fame and greed can't be one of your
vices so they kind of rule that out out
early on in the in the because you'd be
too easy to like flip because you that's
not a job that lends itself to fame or
greed there are people who are flipped
on Greed later on but it's because they
they believe that they're worth more
than what they're making right that's
your aldri am's of the world and your
Richard Hansen of the world your your
people who compromise themselves to a
foreign power in exchange for a paycheck
but in every case in every case of a
converted American asset there was also
an element of sex because what happens
is the people that are attracted to the
kind of dangerous work that happens at
CIA are people who are attracted to high
stress and they don't have a lot of
personal connections that's why they
like operating solo right if you had to
flip a female asset would you rather
have
sex or money in your back pockety money
yeah money and and you're also talking
about a female asset would only be a
non-american asset because CIA doesn't
recruit Americans right right so when I
think of a foreign asset the vast
majority of what foreigners are looking
for is solutions that can be reached
with money more so than solutions that
can be reached with sex even then let me
just give you a real world example even
when an American intelligence officer is
developing or engaging in an operation
against a foreign Target of the opposite
sex when that Target shows a sexual or
romantic interest in the officer it is
critical that we don't reciprocate that
romance or sexuality that instead we
find a way to confront them in a
carrying loving like in a caring
meaningful transactional way and paint
the way for how their their their needs
for connection will be solved with money
with financial stability you can find a
reliable partner with financial
stability you can afford to buy a wife
or buy a husband with financial like
tools you'll be able to gain enough
notoriety Fame that everybody will want
to be with you right rather than
engaging in any kind of romantic
relationship that compromises the
officer to the
case why does why is it considered that
sex compromises the officer and two
reasons one because American culture is
a culture of sexual repression so when
we engage in sexual desires it is
usually because we feel guilty about
exercising those same Desires in our
normal life
so we have to understand and part of our
part of our training helps us understand
our own vices so when you understand
your own vices and you see your own vies
a play you're like oh if I if I go down
this road it's what we call a slippery
slope if I go down this road I'm just
going to slip further down the slope and
slip further towards compromise and then
only bad things happen so that's one
part of the reason why we do it the
second part of the reason why we don't
engage in sex or why we see sex as
something that's compromising is because
it doesn't allow us to institutionalize
the case itself it makes the case
dependent on the person because it's a
romantic transaction rather than
creating a Reliance between the Target
and the institution that is Cia or that
is American uh National Security as long
as you can institutionalize the case it
means that case has longevity because
one day I will leave this country and
you will come into this country and I
need to make it so that the loyalty is
to the institution so that when you take
my place the asset keeps working with
you that's really interesting um if
somebody were trying to an external
agent we're trying to flip an American
woman money sex or love that's that's
connection we replace love with
connection the reason that the to go
back to your original question the
reason that spies have the best sex is
because spies actually understand the
value of connection true connection
connecting sexually is just the most
basic physical representation of
connection transparent conversation
being able to demonstrate vulnerability
true vulnerability being able to invest
fully in the hopes and dreams of each
other right these are all ways that
we're taught to understand human beings
and then we just bring that into sexual
relationships um one of the things
that's the saddest thing to see is when
CIA officers have a hard time ending up
in a loving and meaningful relationship
because the partners that they pick
become intimidated or scared Away by the
level to which that CIA officer is able
to engage in a
relationship because they're able to get
so deep so quickly if they choose to or
they're able to to make it feel like
they're so approachable and so
accessible and so whatever else that the
other person becomes inherently
distrustful so it's very very difficult
and it's very sad to see you know some
of my closest friends have have
been just so talented in everything
about their career and they've struggled
in love and it just creates a very
lonely existence for them um but yeah so
when it comes to a foreign asset
converting an American female I don't
know that it's fair to create a a swath
a generalization of American females um
but what I would say is that American
females are far less susceptible to
sexual um honey traps or what call sex
spionage than American Target American
male targets American male targets are
far more susceptible than American
female targets there's always going to
be exceptions but probability wise if
you're going to use a Honeypot it's very
easy to test a Honeypot against an
American Target that's a male versus
test it against an American female
Target uh have you heard of the book um
rise and kill first no but I will write
that down brother like I'm shocked that
you weren't consulted on it or so it's
about the mad and um it comes from a
proverb in the Bible that if a man is
coming to kill you you should rise early
and kill him
first and uh it it just tracks her whole
thing and anyway in the book they talk
about the three PS which I'm now
forgetting but one of the P's in terms
of how you get an agent to flip and give
you information uh one of the P's is
another the name for a cat or how you
call a cat a kitten which I think
everybody will immediately understand
what I'm talking about uh so yeah I was
not surprised by that like mad are one
of the best in the world at honey traps
really against American targets
specifically interesting why would they
be working against American targets so
we go after allies yeah and and allies
all go after the United States that's
the problem with being the biggest right
we had a major we had major Flaps in
France and Germany I mean just in our in
our adult lives right remember when an
Hill Merkel discovered that Obama's uh
NSA was spying on Germany and it caused
a huge riff yeah right like it it
happens one of the biggest most public
cases of of American Espionage was a
naval officer that was recruited by
Israel and giving away nuclear secrets
about submarines it was it sex bage nope
that in that case really in that case it
was he was Jewish and they targeted him
because he was Jewish ah interesting so
that's not to say again it's not to say
anybody's wrong wrong it's just to say
that there is a leverage there that can
be exploited in some cases it's ideology
about your faith or about your community
or about your uh your value system in
other cases it's ideology about who what
you believe is right or wrong or who you
believe is more powerful or less
powerful right we have a saying at CIA
that you are either in
control or under control there's no
third option so you are either in
control of a situation in control of
your behavior in control of your
thoughts in control of your outcomes or
you are under control of someone else's
thoughts someone else's Behavior someone
else's plans someone else's
outcomes it's up to you to ask yourself
the question which am I at any given
time and what steps am I taking to test
that I am accurate in my assessment of
my current status I like that a lot are
there people that are
unflippable uh
yes I'm going to say yes and when I say
yes what I mean is that Pro the
probability of them being converted is
so small that it's not worth the
investment of time and energy to try to
convert them but the truth is that we
all go through points of Our Lives where
we are more susceptible to being flipped
than we would care to realize and that's
often times what we're trained to do is
Target those individuals who are going
through that phase of life where they
have the right access and the right life
conditions where compromising behavior
is something that you can rapidly
develop in them what are the right
conditions
for that switch to be rapid
so there's um there's major points in
the typical life where you can
anticipate financial needs relationship
needs and uh uh Health needs
those are the major points that you want
to look at so think about your senior
Diplomat your senior executive your
senior military officer who's a few
years away from retirement a few years
away from no longer being relevant and
no longer being paid by the state even
better if they are working for like a
third country or a a competitor First
Nation country where they aren't going
to be taken care of financially very
well in their retirement Sunset years
right but they're still two or three
years out it's a fantastic Target
because they have tons of monetary need
same thing is true with the opposite end
of the spectrum where people are just
starting out but they don't have any
Financial but they they want to rush to
their financial success but they're not
there yet so they'll engage in
compromising Behavior trading their
information or their access in exchange
for extra money right so there's you've
got to always be looking for that those
points in a life where Financial need
becomes relevant children uh aging
parents changes in
career uh hitting ceilings of careers
like these are all points that exist
worldwide for all people right then you
have relationship issues people who are
uh old enough that they should be
married but they're not married or they
believe that they should be married but
they're not married or they've been
divorced or they've been Outcast or
they've been whatever else they pick
their career over their relationship
right these are all people who are very
susceptible to approaches that solve the
relationship problem similarly you've
got the same thing that exists in the
business world people who are struggling
in business people who are trying to
make a business people who are trying to
make a business that's super lucrative
they're missing certain elements in
relationships they don't know the right
people they're not connected to the
right buyers whatever else it might be
so it's a perfect place to step in and
connect two points and this person
becomes wealthy because of an official
business deal but their loyalty is to
you because you become their lead Source
essentially right and then you've got
health issues and health issues are they
apply to the individual but they also
apply to the individual's family and
friends and everything else so if you
are an Iranian you have no access to
Western medicine so if you're an Iranian
nuclear scientist and there's a rare eye
condition in your mother it's the
perfect time for a western power to come
in and say you know we have a hospital
that can take care of your mother if you
have a nuclear secret that you're
willing to trade and that's really how
it all works that same nuclear scientist
10 years earlier would have never talked
to you but today right now they will
there's so much
marketing parallel between Espionage
recruitment operations and just standard
business marketing you've just got to
give them the right message at the right
time to get them to take the right
action and then deliver the
outcome no doubt no doubt Andrew Buon
where where can people follow you uh you
can find me on my homepage everydays
spy.com you can find me on social media
at everyday spy
and then if you want to find my podcast
I'm on all the major platforms and on
YouTube thanks to Mr Tom Bilu for
recommending that last time I was here
and that's the everyday spy podcast love
it thank you for coming on everybody
remember if you're not in control you're
under control and speaking of things
that will put you in control if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care peace check out my
conversation with Constantin kissen he
is one of my favorite people to talk to
and you guys will really enjoy this
episode if you want to be successful in
life it really will come down to the
rules that you play by for most people
Society hands us a set of rules and we
just accept them that works fine in
periods of stability and prosperity but
it becomes disastrous in moment